Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Zimbabwe
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
Unspecified
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
Yes
Clinical trial registration required
Yes
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
No
Age of minors
Under 18
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Clinical research in Zimbabwe is regulated and overseen by the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ), the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ), and the National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA).

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the MSCAct and the MSC-Regs, the MCAZ is a statutory body that has authority for regulating and authorizing clinical trials in Zimbabwe. Further, the MSCAct authorizes MCAZ’s functions related to registering medicines, providing a national laboratory, and appointing a Director-General. The Minister of Zimbabwe’s Ministry of Health and Child Care (MOHCC) appoints MCAZ members. ZWE-3 indicates that the MCAZ is responsible for protecting public health by ensuring that medicines, allied substances, and medical devices are safe, effective, and of good quality by manufacturers and distributors.

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ZWE-GCP, all clinical trials of medicines in Zimbabwe involving human participants must not be initiated until the MCAZ has authorized the conduct of the trial, with the approval of the Secretary for Health and Child Care at the MOHCC, in accordance with the MSCAct, the MSC-Regs, and the MSC-ImportExport. ZWE-4 indicates that the Clinical Trial Unit of MCAZ’s Pharmacovigilance and Clinical Trials (PVCT) Division has regulatory oversight function for clinical trials conducted in Zimbabwe. The Clinical Trial Unit receives, processes, and evaluates applications for approval to conduct studies within Zimbabwe, as well as amendments during the conduct of a study. The CT-AppAuth further indicates that the MCAZ is responsible for authorizing the importation, exportation, and destruction of investigational products (IPs). Per ZWE-68 and the ZWE-GCP, MCAZ’s Licensing and Enforcement Division (LED) issues licenses to pharmacies, manufacturers, and dispensaries involved with IPs. See ZWE-68 for more details on LED operations and additional responsibilities of the LED’s three (3) units: the Licensing Unit, the Enforcement Unit, and the Import/Export Unit. Also see ZWE-2 for an overview of MCAZ’s licensing functions. See ZWE-14 for MCAZ’s clinical trials oversight including guidelines, application forms, and public assessment reports.

Research Council of Zimbabwe

As set forth in the ResearchAct, the RCZ was established as a corporate body to promote, direct, supervise, and coordinate research in the country. In addition, the RCZ is charged with registering foreign researchers and handling matters connected with or incidental to foreign researchers. According to CTEthics, the RCZ is under Zimbabwe’s Ministry of Higher and Tertiary Education, Innovation, Science and Technology Development. Per ZWE-13, the RCZ provides a forum for interaction and discussion among government, academia, and industry. It is also a conduit for financial and infrastructure support for collaborative research among research institutes and councils. To achieve its mission and vision, the RCZ:

Directs relevant quality research and creates knowledge-sharing platforms aimed at addressing national development priorities
Develops and nurtures a research culture for evidence-based decision making
Ensures ethical, safe, and valid research practices
National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

Established through the BioTechAct, ZWE-67 indicates that the NBA was established to promote, regulate, and coordinate the safe and sustainable research, development, and application of biotechnology in agriculture, medicine, energy, and the environment. According to CTEthics, the NBA is under Zimbabwe’s Ministry of Higher and Tertiary Education, Innovation, Science and Technology Development. Per the BioTechAct, the NBA has the following functions that are relevant to clinical trials:

Develop long-term policy for safety in biotechnology in Zimbabwe
Promote biotechnology research, development, and application in Zimbabwe
Review biotechnology/vaccine clinical trials and decide whether to approve, prohibit, or restrict such trials
Review reports and monitor all ongoing approved clinical trials involving high-risk category organisms
Approve the safety aspects of the import, export, manufacture, processing, and selling of any biotechnology products
Advise the customs authorities on the import and export of biologically active material and biotechnology products
Establish contact and maintain a liaison with other countries and international organizations concerned with monitoring or researching biotechnology
The CTEthics reaffirms that the NBA is empowered to approve vaccine clinical trials, as well as oversee biosafety committees and inspect laboratories that store biological agents.

Note that per the BioTechAct, in the NBA’s relation to the RCZ, the RCZ maintains the overall responsibility for the promotion, direction, supervision, and coordination of research in Zimbabwe. The NBA reports to RCZ, as requested, regarding biotechnology research, development, and applications.

Please note: Zimbabwe is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (ZWE-91) which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see ZWE-92.

Contact Information

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

ZWE-66 provides the following MCAZ contact information:

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
106 Baines Avenue
Harare, Zimbabwe
Phone: +263-4-736981/5; 708255; 792165; 0772 145 191/2/3
WhatsApp Number: +263 718 855 934
Toll Free Numbers: Econet – 08080641; TelOne – 08004507

Main Email: mcaz@mcaz.co.zw
Customer Service Email: customerservice@mcaz.co.zw
PVCT Email: pvct@mcaz.co.zw
Imports and Exports Email: imports@mcaz.co.zw
Licensing Email: licensingunit@mcaz.co.zw

Research Council of Zimbabwe

ZWE-13 provides the following RCZ contact information for the main office:

Research Council of Zimbabwe
11 Stafford Road
Mount Pleasant
Harare, Zimbabwe
Phone: +(263) 242 304787/733/861
Email: secretary@rcz.ac.zw

ProcForeignReg provides the following contact information for registration of foreign researchers:

The Executive Director
Research Council of Zimbabwe
Box CY 294
Causeway, Zimbabwe
Phone: +(263) 242-304733, 304787, and 304861
Mobile: +(263) 712954332, +263712954330
Email: technical@rcz.ac.zw

National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

ZWE-16 provides the following NBA contact information:

National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe
21 Princess Drive Newlands
Harare, Zimbabwe
Phone: +(263) 242-782155 /167/856/159 and +(263) 8677 198 735
Email: nba@nba.ac.zw

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

As set forth in the MSCAct, the MSC-Regs, the CT-AppAuth, and ZWE-4, the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) is responsible for regulating and authorizing clinical trials of registered and unregistered investigational products (IPs) in human participants in Zimbabwe. The National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA) and the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ) also have important regulatory roles, as explained in detail below. Per ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, parallel submissions are encouraged to the regulatory authorities and to the national ethics committee (EC)—the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ). However, as indicated in ProcForeignReg, approval by the MRCZ is a prerequisite for RCZ’s consideration of a research permit application by a foreign researcher.

Clinical Trial Review Process

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

ZWE-4 indicates that the Clinical Trial Unit of MCAZ’s Pharmacovigilance and Clinical Trials Division (PVCT) provides regulatory oversight for clinical trials conducted in Zimbabwe. The Clinical Trial Unit receives, processes, and evaluates applications for approval to conduct studies within Zimbabwe, as well as amendments during the conduct of a study. The Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-1) will allocate an in-house reference number and send a letter of acknowledgement of receipt of clinical trial application (CTA) to the principal investigator (PI).

As set forth in the CT-AppAuth, the CTA will be reviewed by external and internal experts appointed by the MCAZ. The initial review may produce questions that need to be addressed by the applicant. Communication with the applicant should be directed through the MCAZ Director General and not through the reviewers. The reviewers will generate an evaluation or assessment report that will be considered by the MCAZ. Applicants will only be allowed three (3) chances to address the raised queries. If the applicant fails to address all outstanding issues within the timeline stipulated in the MCAZ feedback letter, the application will be considered as abandoned and may be rejected. In this case, a new clinical trial application will be required if the applicant wishes to pursue the clinical trial. Next, the MCAZ will make a recommendation for approval or rejection of the application to the Secretary for Health and Child Care, in accordance with the MSCAct. As set forth in the CT-AppAuth, the MCAZ may recommend approval or rejection of the application to the Secretary for Health and Child Care with written reasons for rejection. In the case of rejection, the applicant may appeal in line with the MSCAct. If an application is approved, the MCAZ will issue a clinical trial authorization for the trial with conditions of authorization, including the validity period of the trial. The clinical trial authorization will be valid up to the proposed duration of the study as indicated in the CTA and the authorization form, or for a period deemed necessary by MCAZ, but must not be for more than five (5) years. For a trial proposed to be conducted for more than five (5) years, the applicant must request an extension. MCAZ will issue an updated authorization if the application is found to be satisfactory upon review. If MCAZ raises additional questions, the applicant will have 30 days to respond and then the MCAZ will make its decision. See CT-AppAuth, ZWE-65, and ZWE-4 for flow charts of the CTA submittal and review processes at MCAZ. Per ZWE-GCP, applications for clinical trial renewals should be submitted to MCAZ for approval if the PI wishes to extend the clinical trial beyond the expiration date of the clinical trial stated in the MCAZ authorization. Applications for renewals should be submitted three (3) months before the expiration date and must be processed within 60 calendar days.

As delineated in the CT-AppAuth, clinical trial amendments must be submitted to the MCAZ for review and approval using the appropriate form (ZWE-84 for protocol amendments; ZWE-32 for investigators/sites), and with the applicable fees. Urgent amendments deemed crucial to protect participants or the community may be implemented immediately, but the EC and MCAZ must be notified within 48 hours, followed by a full submission. Amendments affecting participant safety (e.g., dose, regimen, monitoring) require written MCAZ approval before implementation; other changes may be implemented only after MCAZ approval. The PVCT Committee considers each amendment and communicates approval, rejection, or requests for additional information in writing, with a 30-working-day review timeline once documentation is complete. Early submission (at least two (2) weeks before the next PVCT meeting) may shorten the review time. Changes made during an ongoing authorization assessment are not considered amendments. Minor amendments are those not affecting safety, design, or results; major amendments are those that do. Certain changes—such as a new study product, new arms, or major study design/objective changes—require a new clinical trial application. See the CT-AppAuth for additional details.

Per CT-AppAuth, the MCAZ implements an expedited review pathway for certain clinical trial applications. This pathway can be used in the case of public health emergencies or at the request of a PI. If Zimbabwe has been declared to be in a public health emergency disaster by the President or Minister of Health, the World Health Organization (WHO), or any other designated person, an expedited regulatory review pathway for clinical trials will be implemented in line with ZWE-75. The timeline for MCAZ review is 15-30 working days subject to submission of a complete application package. The fees for the expedited review pathway will be as stipulated by the MCAZ. Without unnecessarily compromising patient safety, the shortest realistic timelines will be made a priority. The emergency procedure will involve joint review/inspections, data sharing, and MCAZ communication with the MRCZ to speed up approval of the clinical trial.

CT-AppAuth and ZWE-GCP state that MCAZ will conduct good clinical practice (GCP) inspections either before trial commencement, and/or during clinical trial conduct and/or after completion of the trial in line with the MSCAct mandate to monitor clinical trials from start to finish. Using a risk-based approach, inspections may be routine or may be triggered by issues arising during the assessment of the protocol, annual reports, amendments, or protocol deviations or by other information such as previous inspection experience. The MCAZ’s inspections are meant to ensure compliance with GCP and may be done with or without notification. Combined inspections may be conducted with the MCAZ or the MRCZ. Aspects of the study that will be inspected may include, but are not limited to, the facilities and staff where the studies will be conducted, as approved by the MCAZ; compliance with the approved protocol and any amendment(s) to the protocol; accurate, complete, and current records according to the protocol; and serious adverse event(s) and adverse event(s) reporting according to MCAZ requirements.

Reliance Model and Joint Assessment

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ReliancePlcy, the MCAZ employs a “reliance model” for clinical trial IPs, which means it may take into account and gives significant weight to—either totally or partially rely upon—evaluations performed by another country’s regulatory authority or a trusted institution in reaching its own decision. The approach facilitates conducting regulatory reviews and evaluations in a timely manner and at the same time, accelerates the evaluation process without compromising the quality, safety, and efficacy of IPs, as well as the design of clinical trials. The MCAZ, however, remains responsible and accountable for decisions taken, even when it relies on the decisions and information of others. As indicated in the G-Reliance, MCAZ applies reliance through defined review pathways to reduce evaluation times including abridged review, verification review, mutual recognition, unilateral recognition, World Health Organization (WHO) prequalification for medicines or vaccines, Emergency Use Listing during public health emergencies, agreements or memoranda of understanding, or continental listing of human medicinal products under the African Medicines Regulatory Harmonization Initiative.

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ReliancePlcy, the MCAZ uses the reliance model approach for clinical trial design and/or IPs especially when (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The safety and efficacy of the IP have already been confirmed through WHO prequalification
The IP has been approved in Stringent Regulatory Authorities, which are WHO-listed countries and any other countries considered trustworthy and using publicly accessible clinical trial registries
The clinical trial design and/or IP has been evaluated and found satisfactory at a joint review meeting facilitated by the WHO or the African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF)
The ReliancePlcy indicates that to use the reliance approach for clinical trials, the MCAZ needs proof of approval of the clinical trial design and/or IP by the reference National Regulatory Authority (NRA). The G-Reliance indicates that NRAs may include countries on the list of WHO listed authorities. Further, the reliance approach is not applicable to local requirements, such as ethics approvals, informed consent forms, pharmacy plans, participants’ insurance, etc. See the G-Reliance and the ReliancePlcy for additional details.

The G-Reliance also enables joint assessment and work-sharing between two (2) or more regulatory authorities from regional regulatory networks. MCAZ is part of the Southern African Development Community (ZAZIBONA) joint assessment. The authorities jointly assess the same application and benefit from shared evaluation reports. Each country still makes its own final decision.

Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per the ResearchAct, the RCZ promotes, directs, supervises, and coordinates research in the country; registers foreign researchers, and handles matters connected with or incidental to foreign researchers, including, as specified in the CTEthics, issuing permits for shipment of specimens. Per the CT-AppAuth and ProcForeignReg, foreign researchers must apply for a research permit with RCZ; they must also obtain RCZ approval to export biospecimens and/or materials. (See the Specimen Import & Export section for more information on export of specimens.) Approval by the MRCZ is a prerequisite for RCZ consideration of a research permit application by a foreign researcher. If approved, a Registration Certificate is issued to the institute of affiliation for onward transmission to the foreign researcher. Research permits are issued for a continuous period of one (1) year. After the expiration date, the research may continue upon renewal of the research permit. See ProcForeignReg and ZWE-17 for details on the renewal submission process and ZWE-60 for the renewal application form. In addition, see G-RegForeignStud for guidelines for foreign students to conduct research in Zimbabwe.

In addition, as indicated in ZWE-10, RCZ offers an expedited process for fast-track review of clinical trial submissions. Expedited review does not guarantee approval. If major issues arise during review of the application, the timelines may be extended. To qualify for an expedited review, the application must include:

A letter directed to the Executive Director of RCZ stating the reasons for expediting
Proof of payment of RCZ fees
National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the BioTechAct, the NBA’s responsibilities include reviewing, approving, and monitoring biotechnology/vaccine clinical trials, as well as approving and monitoring the safety aspects of the import, export, manufacture, processing, and selling of any biotechnology products. As set forth in the ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, the NBA is responsible for clearance of recombinant DNA products and issues Trial Release Permits and Facility Registration for clinical trials involving biological products. For clinical trials involving biological products, the MCAZ requires NBA approval or proof of application to the NBA.

See the Clinical Trial Lifecycle topic for more details on the clinical trial submission and review process for these three (3) regulatory agencies.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the MSCAct, the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) is authorized to make regulations to collect fees for its various medicine regulatory functions. As delineated in the MSC-Regs and the CT-AppAuth, applicants are responsible for paying various fees to submit an application to conduct a clinical trial of registered and unregistered human medicines.

The CT-Fees prescribes the following fees for an application to conduct a clinical trial funded by a local sponsor:

Human medicine: $2,000 USD
Sub-study: $1,000 USD
Operational research study: $1,000 USD
Observational study: $200 USD
Any other case: $100 USD
Initial or subsequent amendments to original application funded by a local sponsor: $50 USD
Expedited review: the regular fees outlined above plus 50% of the process-specific fee
For an application to conduct a clinical trial funded by a foreign sponsor, the CT-Fees prescribes the following fees:

Human medicine in a phase I study: $5,000 USD
Human medicine in a phase II study: $4,000 USD
Human medicine in a phase III or IV study: $3,000 USD
Operational: $1,000 USD
Bioavailability/bioequivalence: $500
Observational: $200 USD
Any other case: $200 USD
Initial or subsequent amendments to original application funded by a foreign sponsor: $100 USD
Expedited review: the regular fees outlined above plus 50% of the process-specific fee
Per ZWE-GCP, a MCAZ license is required for a pharmacy involved with a clinical trial. Per CT-Fees, the license application fees for premises other than a pharmaceutical manufacturer’s premises are as follows:

Pharmacy in the Central Business District of a city: $1,900 USD
Pharmacy in any other urban location: $1,000 USD
Pharmacy under a rural district council: $600 USD
Dispensing medical practitioner: $500 USD
Industrial clinic: $250 USD
Dispensary at a local authority clinic: $50 USD
Dispensary at a public health institution: $50 USD
Any other clinic: $150 USD
Per CT-Fees, the license application fees for a pharmaceutical manufacturer’s premises are as follows:

Sterile pharmaceutical manufacturing unit: $6,000 USD
Pharmaceutical manufacturer’s premises with more than three (3) dosage forms and not including sterile product manufacturing facilities: $5,000 USD
Pharmaceutical manufacturer’s premises with up to three (3) dosage forms: $4,500 USD
Restricted pharmaceutical manufacturing premises: $3,500 USD
Per CT-Fees, the application fees to export or import an unregistered medicine is as follows:

Locally sponsored clinical trial: $10 USD (per medicine)
Foreign sponsored clinical trial: $20 USD (per medicine)
Per CT-Fees, the inspection of premises fees are as follows:

Pharmaceutical manufacturer’s premises: $1,000 USD
Other premises: $200 USD
Expedited inspections for other premises: $400 USD plus the cost of the re-inspection
All of the above fees are subject to a 15% value added tax pursuant to the VATTax. See CT-Fees for additional information on MCAZ’s fee schedule, including various renewal fees.

Payment Instructions

Per ZWE-6, payments from within Zimbabwe can be made by cash deposits or direct transfer via the bank details obtained from the MCAZ accounts office. All payments from external sources should be transferred per the bank details indicated on the proforma invoice issued by the MCAZ. Applicants should cover any shortfalls caused by a commission charged by banks during a transfer. Customers are encouraged to always send scanned or physical copies after every deposit into the MCAZ account with full details of payment (e.g., registration fees). For questions, contact the MCAZ at mcaz@mcaz.co.zw.

As per ZWE-6, Zimbabwe also uses EcoCash—a mobile payment tool that enables customers to complete financial transactions directly from their mobile phone. The following are the steps for paying fees via EcoCash:

Dial *151#
Enter the pin number
Select “Make Payment”
Select “Pay Bill”
Enter MCAZ Biller Code “03769”
Enter amount to be paid to MCAZ
Enter account number “0775 648 276”
Provide EcoCash confirmation code and the reason for payment through the following platforms: Email – mcaz@mcaz.co.zw; application forms (visibly indicate the code on the forms); and mobile number 0772 609 540
Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per the ResearchAct and ProcForeignReg, foreign sponsors and researchers are required to register with the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ). RegFeesForeign prescribes the following fees:

Normal registration fee: $500 USD
Penalty for late renewal of registration: $500 per month USD and part thereof
Application for extension of the study: $500 USD
Amendment fee: $500 USD
Shipment of biospecimens (Zimbabwean students): $150 USD
Expedited review: $1,000 USD (plus the normal registration fee of $500)
Payment Instructions

Per RegFeesForeign, the RCZ registration fee for foreign researchers must be by either international money transfer or U.S. dollar cash deposit into the RCZ Foreign Currency Bank Account:

Bank: Commercial Bank of Zimbabwe
Account Name: Research Council of Zimbabwe
Branch: Kwame Nkrumah
Currency Account: USD
Account Number: 011 200 1674 0067
Swift Code: COBZZWHAXXX
Branch Sort Code: 6119

National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

No information is currently available regarding National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA) fees.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

Per the ZWE-GCP, the CTEthics, and ZWE-41, all research involving human participants in Zimbabwe must be reviewed by an institutional ethics committee (EC). Further, according to ZWE-9, all health research conducted in Zimbabwe by any individual or institution is also required to receive approval from the national EC, the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) through its technical National Health Research Development Committee (NHRDC). NHRDC, a technical subcommittee of the MRCZ, was established to provide oversight on all health research conducted in Zimbabwe. Per ZWE-41, MRCZ will only accept for review and approval those research proposals that have been previously approved by an institutional EC.

Per the ResearchAct, CTEthics, ZWE-7, and ZWE-8, MRCZ’s responsibilities include serving as the national EC to provide health researchers and institutions with independent ethical advice and clearance on research. The MRCZ is established and supported by the Ministry of Health and Child Care (MOHCC). ZWE-7 also indicates that the MRCZ is a specialized council of the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ) established under the ResearchAct.

Ethics Committee Composition

Institutional Ethics Committees

As delineated in the CTEthics, institutional ECs should consist of members who, collectively, have the qualifications and experience to review and evaluate the science, health aspects, and ethics of the proposed research. In addition, they should be independent, multi-disciplinary, multi-sectoral, and pluralistic. Specifically, the EC must:

Be representative of the communities it serves and, increasingly, reflect the demographic profile of the population of Zimbabwe
Include members of both genders, although not more than 70% should be either male or female
Have at least nine (9) members, with 60% constituting a quorum
Have a chairperson
Include at least two (2) lay persons who have no affiliation with the institution, are not currently involved in medical or scientific research, and are preferably from the community in which the research is to take place
Include at least one (1) member with knowledge of, and current experience in, areas of research that are likely to be regularly considered by the EC
Include at least one (1) member with knowledge of, and current experience in, the professional care, counseling, or treatment of people (e.g., medical practitioner, psychologist, social worker, or nurse)
Include at least one (1) member who has professional training in both qualitative and quantitative research methodologies
Include at least one (1) member who is legally trained
The institution or organization must ensure that the membership is equipped to address all relevant considerations arising from the likely categories of research. The EC must ensure that it is adequately informed on all aspects of a research protocol, including its scientific and statistical validity, which are relevant to deciding whether the protocol is acceptable on ethical grounds and conforms to the principles of the CTEthics.
ZWE-GCP also sets out guidance on EC composition and states that an EC should consist of at least three (3) professionals in the medical and scientific field with sufficient qualifications and experience; a legal professional; and a religious or consumer representative who is independent of the institution/trial site.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

As described in the CTEthics, the MRCZ is composed of scientists, medical experts, ethicists, patient representatives, and community representatives. It is independent in its reflection, advice, and decisions. Per ZWE-9, the NHRDC is required to approve/disapprove and oversee all health research conducted in Zimbabwe. Members are expected to have interest, knowledge, and experience related to the conduct of health research. As described in the CTEthics, MRCZ’s NHRDC provides health researchers and institutions with independent ethical advice and clearance. The MRCZ’s responsibilities include:

Providing guidance, advice, and approval/disapproval decisions of research protocols intended to be conducted in Zimbabwe by all researchers and health institutions
Providing ethical guidance and advice on research programs undertaken within Zimbabwe
Providing ethical guidance and advice on specific ethical issues presented to it by the institutional ECs and any other interested parties
Developing and/or reviewing, as requested, ethical guidelines for Zimbabwe
Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

Institutional Ethics Committees

As indicated in the CTEthics, when establishing an EC, terms of reference must be set out by the institution and include the scope of its responsibilities, relationship to non-affiliated researchers, accountability, mechanisms for reporting, and remuneration, if any, for members. The institution must determine procedures for recruitment and appointment to the EC. ECs must establish and document operating procedures on the following:

EC meetings, including frequency, preparation of agenda and minutes, distribution of papers prior to meetings, and presentation of research protocols; note the regulations delineate that 60% constitutes a quorum for EC meetings
Presentation of all documents and other materials used to inform potential research participants
Quorum and methods of decision-making
Requirements for submission of research projects for ethical approval
Registration of applications
Timely review and written notification of decisions to researchers
Documentation of decisions and associated reasons, including a meaningful engagement on the ethical issues
Confidentiality of the content of the protocols and of a committee’s proceedings
Reporting of adverse events
Reporting of amendments to protocols
Access to documents and regular monitoring
Complaints procedures
Procedures for easy and adequate access to EC members
Fees charged
End-of-trials review
Per ZWE-GCP, the EC should give its opinion and advice in writing, clearly identifying the trial, the documents reviewed, and the dates of review.

ZWE-GCP states that only those members who are independent of the investigator/sponsor of the trial should make decisions.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

ZWE-11 indicates that MRCZ has monthly meetings to review research proposals. When five (5) copies of a new research proposal are submitted for review to the MRCZ, one (1) copy becomes the MRCZ copy, and the other four (4) copies are sent to external reviewers depending on their area of specialty and the title of the proposal. The external reviewers will send comments back to the MRCZ for consideration at its monthly review meetings.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

Per the CTEthics and the ZWE-GCP, the primary scope of information assessed by institutional ethics committees (ECs) and the national EC—Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ)—relates to maintaining and protecting the rights and dignity of research participants and ensuring their safety and wellbeing throughout their participation in a clinical trial. ECs should be especially vigilant when considering research proposals involving vulnerable populations and for invasive research that has no direct benefit for its participants. (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations.) The ZWE-GCP states that the MRCZ must ensure that participants are protected in accordance with international standards and guidelines. The CTEthics identifies relevant international standards and guidelines in Appendix B.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

Per the ZWE-GCP, the CTEthics, and ZWE-41, all research involving human participants in Zimbabwe must be reviewed by an institutional EC. Further, according to ZWE-9, all health research conducted in Zimbabwe by any individual or institution is also required to receive approval of the national EC, the MRCZ, through its technical National Health Research Development Committee (NHRDC). Per ZWE-41, MRCZ will only accept for review and approval those research proposals that have been previously approved by an institutional EC. Per ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, parallel submissions are encouraged to the regulatory authorities (the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ), the National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA), and the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ)) and to the MRCZ. However as indicated in ProcForeignReg, approval by the MRCZ is a prerequisite for the RCZ’s consideration of a research permit application by a foreign researcher.

As indicated in the CTEthics, if an EC finds reason to believe that continuance of a research project will compromise participants’ welfare, it should immediately seek to establish whether ethical approval for the project should be withdrawn. This process should ensure that researchers and others involved in the project are treated fairly and with respect. Where ethical approval for a research project is withdrawn, the researcher, the institution(s), and, where possible, the participants, should be informed of the withdrawal. The institution must ensure that the researcher promptly suspends the research and arranges to meet the needs of participants. The research may not be resumed unless either the EC establishes that continuance will not compromise participants’ welfare, or the research is modified and approved by the EC.

Institutional Ethics Committees

As laid out in the CTEthics, the institutional EC’s functions are as follows:

Review research proposals and protocols to ensure that research will be conducted to promote health, and to prevent or cure disability and disease
Ensure that humans involved in research are treated with dignity and that their wellbeing is not compromised
Ensure that informed consent is obtained in the case of human participants
Grant institutional approval in instances where research proposals and protocols meet ethical standards
Monitor all research that it has approved
The ZWE-GCP states that the EC should obtain all the information relating to the trial including the protocol, investigators brochure, patient consent forms, insurance for participants, current curriculum vitaes for investigators, and literature detailing the rationale for the study. In its review, the EC should consider the following:

The suitability of the investigator for the proposed trial based on qualifications, experience, supporting staff, and available facilities; the suitability of the protocol in relation to the objectives of the study—its scientific efficiency and risk/benefit, including after the study, particularly in relation to chronic life-threatening conditions
The adequacy and completeness of the written information to be given to the participants, their relatives, guardians, and if necessary, legal representatives
Methods of initial recruitment, delivery of full information, and obtaining informed consent
Provision for compensation/treatment in the case of injury or death of a participant if attributed to a clinical trial, and any insurance or indemnity to cover the liability of the investigator and sponsor
The extent to which investigators and participants may be rewarded/compensated for participation
The suitability of the study population, whether they constitute a vulnerable group, if so whether the study is justified and whether sufficient measures to protect their interest are in place
Whether the number of participants to be recruited is adequate to demonstrate the predicted effect
The risk-benefit analysis takes into account full awareness of benefits and harms beyond the life of the study itself, particularly in relation to chronic life-threatening conditions
Whether placebos can be justified
That by their participation in a clinical study the participants are not denied timely access to medical personnel investigations, equipment, or procedures
That the application allows the participants and/or their representatives’ adequate time to consider the patient information package before informed consent is sought
Per CTEthics, the EC may approve, require amendment to, or reject a research proposal, and it must record its decisions in writing and should include its reasons for rejection. In considering a research protocol, the EC may seek assistance from experts, provided such experts have no conflicts of interest in relation to the research project under consideration. The EC must be satisfied that the research protocol considers participants’ welfare, rights, beliefs, perceptions, customs, and cultural heritage. For research to be conducted in community settings, the proposal must include a clear plan on how the communities will be consulted or involved in the research process, and how they are to be kept informed. Communication between sponsors and ECs should be directed through the principal investigator (PI). All documents and other material used to inform potential research participants should be approved by the EC, including plain-language information sheets, consent forms, questionnaires, advertisements, and letters. An EC may establish procedures for expedited review of research when this is in the public interest. Expedited review and approval may be considered for research where participants have a disease that may be rapidly fatal. In general, research with potential to cause physical or psychological harm should not be considered for expedited review. This includes drug trials, research involving invasive procedures and research involving sensitive personal or cultural issues. Per ZWE-GCP, the EC should give its opinion and advice in writing clearly identifying the trial, the documents reviewed, and the dates of review.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

As described in the CTEthics, the MRCZ’s NHRDC provides health researchers and institutions with independent ethical advice and clearance of research protocols intended to be conducted in Zimbabwe. According to ZWE-9, all health research conducted in Zimbabwe by any individual or institution is required to receive NHRDC approval before initiation. The MRCZ’s Board/Council may further review, approve, or disapprove health research that has been approved or not approved by the NHRDC, as appropriate. (See the Ethics Committee section for details on the MRCZ, and its Board/Council and technical committees.) Further per ZWE-49, the MRCZ’s ethical approval should be submitted to the MCAZ, or proof of submission of an application for MRCZ approval in case of parallel submission.

Per ZWE-GCP, the study’s institutional EC must apply for ethical clearance by the MRCZ. However, the CTEthics states that the PI submits the application to the MRCZ. The clinical trial application is sent to one (1) primary reviewer and two (2) external reviewers who document their comments at the NHRDC/MRCZ meetings. After 3-6 weeks, the reviewers’ and NHRDC/MRCZ’s comments are sent to the researcher for feedback. Per ZWE-9, all health research conducted in Zimbabwe by any individual or institution is required to receive approval of the NHRDC before initiation. The MRCZ may further review, approve, or disapprove health research that has been approved or not approved by the NHRDC, as appropriate. The CTEthics states that if conditional approval is granted, the sponsor should register with the RCZ if it has foreign researchers. The MRCZ’s approval is issued upon payment of a 1% levy and production of a RCZ registration permit, if applicable.

For continuing review, ZWE-41 states that MRCZ requires investigators to submit an annual review form (ZWE-42). ZWE-11 indicates that if investigators wish to amend or modify an ongoing MRCZ-approved research study, they must submit a request to the MRCZ and receive MRCZ approval before implementing the proposed modification, unless the change is designed to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to participants.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Institutional Ethics Committees

The CTEthics indicates that an institutional ethics committee (EC) should establish and record working procedures concerning review fees charged.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

Pursuant to CTEthics, ZWE-41, and ZWE-11, the prescribed fees (posted in US dollars) for ethical review by the national EC, the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ), are as follows (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Normal registration for new study: $500 USD
Expedited review for new study: $1,000 USD
Exemption review for new study: $200 USD
Undergraduate students: $10 USD
Masters level dissertation: $50 USD
PhD students: $200 USD
Penalty for late submission of annual continuing review application: $200 USD after 30 days; $1,200 USD exceeding six (6) months
Application for study extension: $100 USD per study
Levies: 1% of total study for MRCZ monitoring and administration or a flat fee of $100 USD with a budget of less than $10,000 USD
Inspection fee: $300 USD (only applicable if inspection is requested)
Amendment application: $50 USD per amendment
Expedited amendment: $100 USD per expedited amendment
Penalty for late submission of serious adverse events: $20 USD per day
Payment Instructions

Per ZWE-41, payments should be submitted to the following bank:

MRCZ NOSTRO
NMB Bank
Account Name: Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
NOSTRO Account number: 0000350046119
Branch Code: 11112
Branch: EXCELLENCE
Bank: NMB Bank Limited

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

In addition to its research ethics review function, the CTEthics indicates that the role of the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) is to promote, accredit, and monitor compliance of institutional ethics committees (ECs) within relevant legislation and regulations, ethical guidelines, and standards.

Registration Auditing, and Accreditation

No information is currently available.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the MSCAct, the MSC-Regs, the CT-AppAuth, the ZWE-GCP, and ZWE-4, Zimbabwe requires the sponsor to obtain clinical trial authorization from the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ). MCAZ is responsible for regulating and authorizing clinical trials of investigational products (IPs) in human participants in Zimbabwe, with the National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA) and the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ) also playing important regulatory roles. Per the ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, parallel submissions are encouraged among the regulatory authorities and to the national ethics committee (EC), the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ). However, as indicated in ProcForeignReg, approval by the MRCZ is a prerequisite for RCZ consideration of a research permit application by a foreign researcher.

Regulatory Submission

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the CT-AppAuth, to obtain MCAZ review and authorization, the sponsor must file a clinical trial application (CTA) on form MC 10 (ZWE-28) via the Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-1) and include the appropriate fee and all the relevant documents. For guidance on how to navigate ZWE-1, refer to the user manual (ZWE-85). While there is no language requirement indicated, the application form (ZWE-28) is in English. Note that per the ZWE-GCP, both the English and applicable vernacular versions (e.g., Shona/Ndebele) must be used in consent materials.

CT-AppAuth indicates that a letter of acknowledgement of receipt of the CTA will be sent to the principal investigator (PI) by ZWE-1. Note the CT-AppAuth indicates that researchers may request a pre-submission meeting or submit pre-submission questions prior to submission of CTAs. Requests for pre-submission meetings should be submitted in writing to MCAZ with a summary of the proposed study, a list of preliminary questions, a summary of significant quality aspects of the IP, and any other pertinent documents. ZWE-37 is the meeting request form, which is also available at the MCAZ reception. (See the Regulatory Authority section for contact information.) According to ZWE-65, during a pre-submission meeting, participants may discuss document screening, fee quotations, and/or the applicable regulations.

As delineated in the CT-AppAuth, clinical trial amendments must be submitted to the MCAZ for review and approval using the appropriate form (ZWE-84 for protocol amendments; ZWE-32 for investigators/sites), with applicable fees. Urgent amendments deemed crucial to protect participants or the community may be implemented immediately, but the EC and MCAZ must be notified within 48 hours, followed by a full submission. Amendments affecting participant safety (e.g., dose, regimen, monitoring) require written MCAZ approval before implementation; other changes may be implemented only after MCAZ approval. Minor amendments are those not affecting safety, design, or results; major amendments are those that do. Certain changes—such as a new study product, new arms, or major study design/objective changes—require a new clinical trial application. See the CT-AppAuth for additional details.

Per CT-AppAuth, the MCAZ implements an expedited review pathway for certain clinical trial applications. This pathway can be used in the case of public health emergencies. The documentation to be submitted will be the same as outlined above but could be revised on a case-by-case basis. Researchers are encouraged to have pre-submission meetings with the MCAZ to discuss their protocol and any anticipated problems so that the approval process will be shortened. The MCAZ will also coordinate with relevant stakeholders such as the World Health Organization (WHO), the African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF), the MRCZ, and others when necessary to achieve the desired result. To initiate the submission process, the applicant should send an email of intention to the MRCZ and the MCAZ, with a copy to the AVAREF Secretariat at afrgoavaref@who.int. The MRCZ and the MCAZ will then set up a pre-submission meeting with the applicant and communicate the meeting outcome to the AVAREF Secretariat. Also see the ZWE-GCP for additional guidance on this emergency process.

Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per the CT-AppAuth and ProcForeignReg, to obtain a research permit from the RCZ, foreign researchers should seek an affiliated institution in the area of the intended research in Zimbabwe. The ProcForeignReg further explains that if accepted by that institution, then the institution of affiliation in Zimbabwe forwards the application to the RCZ. Recognized institutions of affiliation are universities, government ministries, and government departments that run their own budgets, and whose head is an accounting officer, as well as any other publicly funded institutions as determined by the RCZ. ZWE-12 also indicates that the following organizations are recognized as institutions of affiliation by the RCZ:

All government research stations
All government ministries and departments
All universities
According to the ProcForeignReg, private and foreign institutions can have special collaborative arrangements with Zimbabwean public institutions. All foreign researchers must submit the application form (ZWE-59) and pay a non-refundable application fee of US $500.00, or as determined by the RCZ. (See the Regulatory Fees section for more information on paying this fee.)

The Trslt-Ntc requires foreign researchers to use qualified translation institutions for translation of research materials. All translated research materials should be accompanied by a confirmation from a qualified translation institution. See ZWE-5 for a list of qualified language institutions.

National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the NBA-Proc, vaccine clinical trial protocols must be submitted by the investigator to the institutional biosafety committee (IBC), followed by submission to the NBA. The applicant must answer all questions set forth in the NBA-Proc. The IBC will forward the proposal to the NBA after its approval. Where a proposal includes commercially sensitive information, the applicant may mark relevant portions as “Commercial-in-confidence” with reasons. Where material is clearly so marked, the NBA will treat it as confidential unless it decides that some disclosure is necessary. In that event, the NBA will notify the applicant in writing and subsequently negotiate a mutually agreed upon resolution. If agreement is not reached, then the proposal may be withdrawn, without disclosure or prejudice, at any time prior to the necessary disclosure in pursuit of approval. For clinical trials involving biological products, the MCAZ requires NBA approval or proof of application to the NBA.

Ethics Review Submission

Institutional Ethics Committee

According to the ZWE-GCP, the CTEthics, and ZWE-41, all research involving human participants in Zimbabwe must be reviewed by an institutional EC, followed by the national EC, the MRCZ. The submission process at institutional ECs will vary. For an example of an institutional EC submission process, see ZWE-25.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

CTEthics states that the PI must submit an application to the MRCZ and bears full responsibility for the scientific and ethical aspects of the study. To submit an application for MRCZ ethical review, ZWE-41 specifies that all electronic copies must be submitted in PDF format, and that application forms not completed electronically will not be accepted. (Note that ZWE-41 states that undergraduate and masters students are required to submit two (2) clearly labelled flat file copies of the required documents, while ZWE-11 indicates that students must submit two (2) hard copies of all the required documents.) Per ZWE-41 and ZWE-11, electronic copies of applications should be submitted to mrcz@mrcz.org.zw. Per ZWE-44, applicants should respond to comments using the MRCZ form (ZWE-44) within two (2) weeks of receipt of comments from the MRCZ.

Per ZWE-55, to withdraw an MRCZ application, all research activities must not have been implemented. The form (ZWE-55) and a cover letter must be submitted to MRCZ. The PI must also notify all relevant authorities that the protocol has been withdrawn from consideration by the MRCZ.

As indicated in ProcForeignReg, MRCZ approval is a prerequisite for RCZ consideration of a research permit application by a foreign researcher or for shipment of biospecimens. Per ZWE-89, the MRCZ will forward the application for registration of a foreign researcher to the RCZ. The applicant must prepare 10 flat files, with each document in all of the 10 files clearly labeled. Of the 10 copies, eight (8) are for the RCZ, one (1) is for the MRCZ, and one (1) is for the applicant. Both the MRCZ and the RCZ must sign ZWE-89 and receive a copy of it.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

As specified in the CT-AppAuth, a clinical trial submission package to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) should contain the following documents:

Cover letter
Study protocol
Investigator’s brochure
Clinical trial pharmacy protocol/plan and MCAZ pharmacy license, where applicable (See the Pharm-IMPs for guidance on the pharmacy plan)
Documentation of participant insurance for trial-related injuries
Letter endorsing generic insurance certificate, if necessary
Ethics approval or copy of letter applying for ethics committee (EC) approval and other relevant Zimbabwean regulatory approvals
Proof of approval of study by the national regulatory authority in country of origin
Proof of provision of Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB), Data Monitoring Committee, or Safety Monitoring Committee
Monitoring plan
Signed declarations: the declarations for good clinical practice (GCP) compliance by the principal investigator (PI) (ZWE-34) and the co- and sub-investigators (ZWE-33); joint declaration by the sponsor and PI regarding sufficient funds to complete the study (ZWE-35); and the applicant’s declaration (ZWE-90) that the package is complete and truthful and the study will be conducted in accordance with applicable legal, ethical, and regulatory requirements
Recruitment advertisements (if applicable)
Patient information leaflet(s) and informed consent forms (ICF), including vernacular versions and English translations; the MSC-Regs requires the participant’s consent be documented in ZWE-30
Pharmaceutical dossier for new investigational products (IP), including stability data (Where some of the proprietary information on the IP is not available to the PI, the sponsor or manufacturer can send the IP directly to the MCAZ)
Any other relevant attachments such as GCP certificates and curriculum vitaes (CVs) for the investigator(s), coordinator(s), or monitor(s); see ZWE-36 for the recommended CV format
In addition, according to ZWE-83, for biological products (e.g., vaccines), proof of application to the local Bio Safety Board must also be submitted. In addition, MCAZ is open to a pre-submission meeting with the protocol team.

Regarding applications for amendments, the CT-AppAuth requires the following to be submitted:

A cover letter from the PI
Proof of fee payment
The amendment application form (ZWE-84)
Each amendment in bold and deleted text struck through
A table in a covering letter that details all amended parts of the protocol with reasons or justification
A description of the possible consequences for participants already enrolled must be described; if the amendments affect the participants, describe the inclusion and/or exclusion criteria, dosage regimen, safety, visits, etc.
An amended informed consent form, as needed
Any additional risks or safety issues
The amended supporting documents should be appended, including any new relevant publications
Protocol or documentation with tracked changes and clean copy of the protocol or documentation
National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the NBA-Proc, an application for approval of a vaccine or biological product must provide answers to all the questions in NBA-Proc pertaining to:

Aims and objectives
The nature of the vaccine
Population size and location of release
Habitat and ecology
The route of administration and associated safety concerns and treatment regimes
Post-trial vaccine uses and risks to general population
Existing evidence regarding level and duration of immunity
Guidelines regarding waste disposal of the vaccine and its residue
Information on use of the host vaccine organism in other human or animal vaccines
See NBA-Proc for additional considerations and the detailed questions.

Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per ProcForeignReg, foreign researchers must submit the following application materials to obtain a research permit from the RCZ:

Clear statement of the purpose of their intended research on the application forms
Ten copies of the completed application form (ZWE-59), and one (1) research proposal per project must be submitted to The Executive Director of the Research Council of Zimbabwe (See the Regulatory Authority section for contact details); for joint projects, one (1) comprehensive research proposal is required and each applicant must submit 13 copies of the completed application form (ZWE-59)
Ten copies of completed Specimens Transfer Agreement form (ZWE-63) if the application involves shipment of specimens
Thirteen copies of the Materials Transfer Agreement form (ZWE-62) for shipment of non-biological specimens
Thirteen copies of each letter of support from a Zimbabwean institution of affiliation and other institutions that may be consulted during the research
Evidence of adequate funds for the period of research
In addition, ZWE-10 states that for expedited review, the clinical trial application must include:

A letter directed to the Executive Director of RCZ stating the reasons for expediting
Proof of payment of RCZ fees
Ethics Committee Requirements

Institutional Ethics Committees

The submission process at institutional ECs will vary. For an example of institutional EC submission content requirements, see ZWE-25.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

ZWE-41 specifies the following submission content requirements:

Masters & Bachelors of Science (BSc) students must submit two (2) clearly labelled flat file copies of the following:

Completed MRCZ application form (ZWE-41)
Research proposal summary (maximum four (4) pages)
Full research proposal
Informed consent forms (ICFs) on MRCZ template: English, appropriate vernacular versions
Data collection tools: English and vernacular versions (Shona/Ndebele/appropriate language)
Letter of support from supervisor
Proof of registration with learning institution
University or institutional EC approval
Supplementary information as applicable
Permission letter from head of institution where data is to be collected (For research in schools, a letter from the Ministry of Education is a requirement)
CV of the student
PhD students should submit an electronic copy of the following:

Completed MRCZ application form (ZWE-41)
Full research proposal
Research proposal summary (maximum four (4) pages)
ICFs on MRCZ ICF template (English, applicable local languages, and backtranslations)
Specimen Storage and shipment consent form (English, applicable local languages, and backtranslations)
Questionnaires and any other data collection tools (English, applicable local languages, and backtranslations)
Drug brochure or supplementary information if applicable
CVs for the principal and co-investigators
Proof of registration with learning institution
Evidence of International Council for Harmonisation’s (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) training
Letter from academic supervisor authorizing submission of proposal to MRCZ
Name, contact details, and detailed CV of academic supervisor(s)
For candidates registered with foreign institutions, contact details and letter from proposed local co-supervisor/adviser confirming willingness to supervise/advise
University or institutional EC approval
Permission letter from head of institution where data is to be collected (For research in schools, a letter from the Ministry of Education is a requirement)
For individual researcher studies and exemption reviews, an electronic copy of the following should be submitted:

Completed MRCZ application form (ZWE-41)
Research proposal summary (maximum four (4) pages)
Full research proposal
Evidence of ICH-GCP training for investigators
ICFs on MRCZ template (in English, appropriate local language, and backtranslations)
Data collection tools (in English, appropriate local language, and backtranslations)
CVs for the principal and co-investigators
Drug brochure or supplementary information if applicable
University or institutional EC approval
Permission letter from head of institution where data is to be collected (For research in schools, a letter from the Ministry of Education is a requirement)
Proof of funding on sponsor’s letterhead
For applications for continuing review of research and for amendments/modifications, investigators should use ZWE-42 and ZWE-43, respectively. An application for extension of the research duration must be submitted to the MRCZ using the form at ZWE-51.

Per ZWE-89, an application for registration of a foreign researcher must contain 10 copies of each of the following documents (to be forwarded by MRCZ to RCZ):

Application letter from institution of affiliation
MRCZ cover letter
A valid MRCZ approval letter
RCZ application form (ZWE-59) or renewal form (ZWE-60)
Proof of funding
PI’s and co-investigators’ CVs
Study summary
Study protocol
ICFs in English and Shona
Questionnaire
Research report if application is for renewal
Current registration certificate if application is for renewal
GCP certificate
Temporary employment permit, where applicable
Identification documents if applicant is a permanent resident
Proof of payment of RCZ registration fee
See Specimen Import & Export section for the submission content for shipment of biospecimens.

Clinical Protocol

According to the CT-AppAuth, the clinical protocol should contain the follow elements:

General information, including the protocol title, version number, and date
Contact information for the sponsor, monitor, person(s) authorized to sign the protocol and protocol amendment for the sponsor, the sponsor’s medical expert for the trial, the investigator(s), the qualified physician who is responsible for medical decisions, and the clinical laboratory(ies) and other entities involved in the trial
Justification for the study
Name and description of the IP(s)
The risk-benefit assessment
Description of the route of administration, dosage, dosage regimen, and treatment period
A statement that the trial will comply with the protocol and all other regulatory requirements
Description of the population to be studied with adequate justification for vulnerable participants
Trial objectives and purpose
Trial design
Treatment of study participants
Assessment of efficacy
Safety information, including safety parameters, adverse event reporting procedures, specimens collection procedures, and the names, composition, and qualifications of the Drug Safety Monitoring Board
Statistics
Agreement that the investigator will permit inspections and direct access to source data/documents from the MCAZ and the MRCZ
Quality control and quality assurance in line with ZWE-73
Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

Per ZWE-GCP, parallel submissions are encouraged among the regulatory authorities, which comprise the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ), the National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA), and the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ), and to the national ethics committee (EC)—the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ). However as indicated in ProcForeignReg, approval by the MRCZ is a prerequisite for the RCZ’s consideration of a research permit application by a foreign researcher.

Regulatory Authority Approval

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

As described in the CT-AppAuth, the review and approval process in Zimbabwe should take 60 working days from the time the completed application is received by the MCAZ’s Pharmacovigilance and Clinical Trials (PVCT) Division up until approval. This timeline excludes the time when the applicant is addressing any follow-up questions from the PVCT. In addition, MCAZ implements an expedited review pathway for certain clinical trial applications. The expedited review timeline is 15-30 working days subject to submission of a complete application package.

Per CT-AppAuth, if Zimbabwe has been declared to be in a public health emergency, a timeline of 10 working days is recommended for processing of clinical trial applications where the product is already registered for other indication(s), or for old products which are known and 15 working days for novel products. These timelines are for the entire process from receipt application to the final decision, with the exception of clock stops in line with ZWE-75. The MCAZ will also coordinate with relevant stakeholders such as the World Health Organization (WHO), the African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF), the MRCZ, and others when necessary.

National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

While the NBA does not have review timelines available, ZWE-74 indicates that the review of vaccine clinical trial applications take approximately four (4) to six (6) weeks.

Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per ZWE-83, the RCZ review period is usually between six (6) to eight (8) weeks, with meeting dates scheduled on the last Thursday of every month for the review of submissions.

Ethics Committee Approval

Institutional Ethics Committees

The timeline of review at institutional ECs will vary. For an example of institutional EC review procedures, see ZWE-25.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per ZWE-11, it takes four (4) to six (6) weeks for MRCZ to review a clinical trial application. According to ZWE-74, clinical trials conducted in response to a public health emergency qualify for expedited review and will be reviewed within 10 business days. ZWE-41 lays out the following turnaround timelines (i.e., review period):

Individual researcher/studies: four (4) to six (6) weeks
Fast-track review for new studies: 10 working days
Exemption review for new studies: 10 working days
PhD students: four (4) to six (6) weeks
Masters students: five (5) working days
Undergraduate students: five (5) working days
Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ZWE-GCP, all clinical trials of medicines in Zimbabwe involving human participants must not be initiated until the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) has authorized the conduct of the trial, with the approval of the Secretary for Health and Child Care at the Ministry of Health and Child Care (MOHCC), in accordance with the MSCAct, the MSC-Regs, and the MSC-ImportExport. Per the MSCAct and the CT-AppAuth, once a clinical trial is approved, the principal investigator (PI) is required to complete and sign the indemnity form (ZWE-40) appended to the authorization certificate and return it to the MCAZ prior to commencement of the clinical trial. The MSCAct mandates that before commencing an authorized clinical trial, the investigator must inform all participants about the aims and objectives of the clinical trial and how it will be conducted; the possible risks, discomforts, and other adverse effects that may result; and provide insurance to each participant to cover trial-related injuries.

The ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth require that clinical trials in Zimbabwe be conducted in accordance with good clinical practice (GCP) in ZWE-GCP, which is derived from the International Council for Harmonisation’s (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZWE-73) and other international guidance material. Further, regarding the conduct of clinical trials, the ZWE-GCP states that it should be read in conjunction with other ICH guidelines (ZWE-80) such as E2A (clinical safety data management), E3 (clinical study reporting), E7 (geriatric populations), E8 (general considerations for clinical trials), E9 (statistical principles), and E11 (pediatric populations).

Clinical Trial Agreement

Prior to initiating the trial, ZWE-GCP requires a written agreement between the sponsor and investigators as part of the protocol or in a separate agreement. The sponsor must obtain the investigators’/institutions’ agreement on the following items:

The trial will be conducted in compliance with GCP and with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor
The trial will comply with procedures for data recording/reporting and permits monitoring, auditing, and inspection/access according to the protocol; regarding access, all parties must agree to ensure direct access to all trial-related sites, source data/documents, and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities
The definition, establishment, and assignment of responsibilities specified in the protocol, including data management, unblinding of treatment codes, statistical considerations, and preparation of the final clinical report
The sponsor and all investigators must sign and date the protocol to confirm agreement. In addition, the financial aspects of the trial should be documented in an agreement between the sponsor and the investigator/institution. Upon signing the application, all parties accept the responsibility that all applicable regulations and requirements will be adhered to. Furthermore, all parties are responsible for ensuring that the trial is based on and implemented according to well-founded ethical and scientific principles, as expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki (ZWE-70) and local and international guidelines for GCP.

See the Site/Investigator Selection section for details on selection requirements for investigators and clinical trial sites.

Clinical Trial Registration

As per the CT-AppAuth, the Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-1) is the platform for both submitting clinical trial applications and registering approved clinical trials. In addition, the PI must submit the approved clinical trial to a publicly accessible registry platform, such as the Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (PACTR) platform (ZWE-27).

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

According to the ZWE-GCP, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Zimbabwe’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any undesirable experience occurring to a participant during a clinical trial, whether or not considered related to the investigational product(s) (IP). An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not related to the IP.
Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI) – Any untoward medical occurrence that follows immunization and does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the usage of the vaccine. The AE may be any unfavorable or unintended sign, abnormal laboratory finding, symptom, or disease.
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – A response to a medicinal product that is noxious and unintended, and which occurs at doses normally used for the prophylaxis, diagnosis, or therapy of disease, or for the modification of physiological function. In the pre-approval clinical experience with a new medicinal product or its new intended usages, particularly as the therapeutic dose(s) may not be established, this includes all unintended responses to any dose. The phrase “responses to a medicinal product” means that a causal relationship between a medicinal product and an AE is at least a reasonable possibility.
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose results in death, is life threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or is a congenital anomaly/birth defect.
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction – An adverse reaction, the nature or severity of which is not consistent with the applicable product information (e.g., Investigator's Brochure for an unapproved IP or package insert/summary of product characteristics for an approved product).
See the CTEthics for additional guidance on safety definitions.

Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ZWE-GCP, all AE safety reports must be submitted to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ)’s Pharmacovigilance Electronic Reporting System (ZWE-76). The principal investigator (PI) is responsible for reporting safety reports to MCAZ and is required to report Individual Case Safety Reports (AEs, ADRs and/or AEFIs) to the MCAZ. Reports of SAEs during the trial must be reported promptly to the MCAZ as soon as possible but no later than seven (7) calendar days of occurrence being known by the PI/investigators, followed by as complete a report as possible within eight (8) additional calendar days. This report must include an assessment of the importance and implication of the findings, including relevant previous experience with the same or similar medicinal products. The PI is required to submit an online safety report on the MCAZ e-PV system (ZWE-76). The safety report summaries, including known and unknown as AE/SAE/AEFI log and Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)/Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) interim data analysis reports, are also required. The SAE report form should be complete and detailed, including information such as laboratory results submitted to enable causality assessment of the report. Follow-up information should also be submitted as soon as it becomes available within eight (8) additional calendar days, including copies of diagnostic test results, laboratory reports, or medical record progress notes. All additional information should be clearly marked as updated information and should include the Protocol Number and Volunteer ID Number. MCAZ’s advisory Pharmacovigilance and Clinical Trials Committee, which meets monthly and does causality assessment of the reports, sends written feedback to the PI. MCAZ may need to contact the clinical site for additional information regarding the SAE. For additional guidance on using ZWE-76, see ZWE-87.

Further, CT-AppAuth states that the PI should submit non-serious AEs as line listings and summaries during the submission of annual reports. Foreign individual case safety reports should be reported within seven (7) days when there is a major safety issue or regulatory decision which impacts/changes the risk-benefit profile of the product or on specific request by MCAZ. IP defect(s) are also required to be reported in line with the MCAZ product defect form and MCAZ guidelines for the Notification of a Medicinal Product Problem or Defect and Recall Procedure in Zimbabwe available on MCAZ’s website: www.mcaz.co.zw. DSMB/DMC and other types of safety reports in relation to the benefit/risk assessment of the study safety and subsequent protocol amendments or clarification memorandums should also be submitted to MCAZ on ZWE-76. Reports on protocol deviation(s) and violation(s) including the corrective action taken should also be submitted to MCAZ.

According to CTEthics, all AE reports and management issues should be transmitted to the ethics committee (EC), ideally through the PI, who should be fully informed of these issues. The investigator must sign the adverse event table (ZWE-48) and submit it to the EC.

Per ZWE-11, investigators must submit prompt reports to the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) of any unanticipated problems involving risks to the participants or others, and reports of serious or continuing noncompliance with the regulations or the EC’s requirements. If a death occurs during the research, ZWE-46 requires that the death report form (ZWE-46) be submitted to the MRCZ within three (3) days of the site becoming aware. The entire death report form must be completed by a certified medical practitioner. With regard to protocol deviations, each incident of deviation or violation must be reported to the MRCZ within seven (7) days of site awareness using the form at ZWE-53. If an institutional EC terminates a study, the investigators must report it to the MRCZ using the form at ZWE-47. The form at ZWE-56 must be used to apply to MRCZ for re-opening a study that had been previously terminated.

According to the CTEthics, the PI bears full responsibility for the scientific and ethical aspects of their study, and are the means of communication with the EC. The PharmVigHdbk affirms that the investigator is responsible for proper reporting of SAEs to the MCAZ. The ZWE-GCP requires the investigator to ensure that all SAEs are reported promptly to the MCAZ, the sponsor, and the EC. Proper protection procedures or treatments should be administered to trial participants experiencing SAEs. When significant noncompliance with the trial protocol is discovered, the PI should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions. The PI is required to submit a protocol deviation report to the MCAZ within seven (7) days of site awareness of the deviation or violation, including deviations from, or changes to, the protocol to eliminate immediate hazards to the trial participants; changes that increase the risk to participants and/or affect significantly the conduct of the trial; all ADRs that are both serious and unexpected; and new information that may affect adversely the safety of participants or the conduct of the trial. Per ZWE-11, in addition to the requirements of a particular research study, investigators are responsible for ongoing safety requirements in the conduct of approved research.

Sponsor Responsibilities

The ZWE-GCP requires the sponsor to report all AEs occurring during the course of the trial to the MCAZ. The sponsor should expedite reporting all SAEs to the EC and the MCAZ and immediately undertake appropriate and necessary measures and treatment to protect trial participants in coordination with the investigator(s). Further, the sponsor must submit requested records within 48 hours if safety concerns arise.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the CT-AppAuth and ZWE-GCP, the sponsor must submit all AE safety reports to ZWE-76. To view the ADR form, see ZWE-38; to view the SAE form, see ZWE-39. Separate forms must be used for separate reportable AEs. The ZWE-GCP states that if there are any challenges accessing ZWE-76, hard copies of the safety report should be submitted to the MCAZ, including causality outcome by the sponsor and participant management. ZWE-66 provides the following MCAZ address for delivery of hard copies:

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
106 Baines Avenue
Harare, Zimbabwe

Institutional Ethics Committees

Because each EC has its own form completion and delivery requirements, investigators and sponsors should review their EC procedures.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

To submit forms and for more information, contact the MRCZ. Per ZWE-78, MRCZ’s contact information is:

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
20 Cambridge Road
Avondale
Harare, Zimbabwe
Phone: +263 86 44073 772

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

Medical Control Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ZWE-GCP, principal investigators (PIs) are required to submit annual progress reports (ZWE-77) for all ongoing clinical trials to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ). ZWE-77 specifies that all sections of the form must be completed electronically. The form and accompanying documents must be submitted by January 31st annually to the MCAZ office or via email at mcaz@mcaz.co.zw. The progress report should contain the following:

MCAZ reference number
Actual date of commencement and the study duration; indicate if an extension is requested
Protocol version number
Study title
Study sites
Reporting period
Institution
PI name, address, phone number, and email
Other contact information, if applicable
Regulatory compliance information, including the number of good clinical practice (GCP) monitoring visits, GCP audits, the insurance certificate, the clinical trial indemnity form, the MCAZ premises license for the research pharmacy, and the investigational product (IP) approval
Study status, including information on enrollment and data analysis
Total number of people consented and screened and, of those, total number eligible for the study
Total number of participants to which the IP has been administered
Number of participants left to be enrolled in the coming months (years)
Number of participants in the following categories: currently active in study; follow-up data collection only; completed intervention and any follow-up; and lost to follow-up
Information on adverse events, protocol deviations/violations, complications, and withdrawals
Status of the IP, including how many were imported, records of destruction, and any quality issues
Research Council of Zimbabwe

ProcForeignReg requires that all foreign researcher applications for extensions of research permits be accompanied by a brief progress report of the completed research to the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ). The renewal registration form (ZWE-60) should be submitted together with a progress report, institution of affiliation letter, Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) conditional approval letter, summary protocol, proof of funding, and the proof of payment of RCZ registration. This must be submitted not later than one (1) month before the expiration date.

Institutional Ethics Committees

Per the CTEthics, the ethics committee (EC) must ensure that the conduct of all research is monitored. At least annually, the EC must request reports from the PI on matters including:

Progress to date, or outcome in the case of completed research
Information concerning maintenance and security of records
Evidence of compliance with the approved protocol
Evidence of compliance with any conditions of approval
ECs should inform the PI, in writing, of decisions made after the review of progress reports. An EC may recommend and adopt any additional appropriate mechanism for monitoring, including the random inspection of research sites, data, signed consent forms, and records of interviews, with the prior consent of research participants. Because each EC has its own reporting requirements, investigators and sponsors should review their EC procedures.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per ZWE-11, investigators are responsible for ensuring that progress reports and requests for continuing review are submitted to the MRCZ.

Final Report

Medical Control Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the MSCAct and the ZWE-GCP, not later than 30 days after the completion of a clinical trial, the PI is required to submit to the MCAZ a preliminary report on the ethical evaluation of the clinical trial. Then, not later than 90 days after the completion of the trial, a comprehensive report and a report on any serious or adverse events found during the trial must be submitted to the MCAZ.

In contrast, CT-AppAuth requires the PI and sponsor to submit a preliminary final report three (3) months after completion of the study and a final report six (6) months after completion of the study including any publications. The final report should follow international expectations for clinical trial reporting, including the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZWE-73). There must be a complete and comprehensive description of the study and its outcomes. The protocol, statistical, and clinical aspects should be included in the final study report to be able to verify that the final report is consistent with the study data generated. A final report is also required for a study that may be prematurely stopped due to safety reasons or other reasons. The MCAZ prohibits dissemination or publication of clinical trial results without prior submission of the same results to the MCAZ.

Research Council of Zimbabwe

ProcForeignReg requires that foreign researchers submit a detailed report and end of study form to the RCZ and the National Archives within one (1) year of completing the research.

Institutional Ethics Committees

Because each EC has its own requirements, investigators and sponsors should review their EC’s final report procedures.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per ZWE-11, the investigator submits a final report to the MRCZ when the clinical trial is complete, i.e., all interventions or interactions with participants have been completed, and all data collection and analysis have been finished. The investigator notifies the MRCZ through a completely filled in termination form (ZWE-47) with the final report attached. In compliance with confidentiality requirements, the investigator may keep the data collected, including identifiable private data, consistent with the MRCZ-approved research plan. In addition, the investigator should meet other commitments that were agreed to as part of the approved research, for example, providing information about the study results to research participants, or honoring commitments for compensation to participants.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Per the ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, a sponsor is defined as an individual, company, institution, or organization that takes responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a trial. The CT-AppAuth adds that this excludes an individual company, institution, or organization that has been requested to provide money for a trial and does not benefit in any way from the results of the trial. A sponsor can be foreign, however, per CT-AppAuth and ProcForeignReg, their researchers must apply for a research permit with the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ).

According to the ZWE-GCP, a sponsor may transfer any or all of the sponsor's trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO), but the ultimate responsibility for the quality and integrity of the trial data always resides with the sponsor. Any trial-related duty and function that is transferred to and assumed by a CRO should be specified in writing and submitted for regulatory approval by the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) and the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) as protocol amendments. The sponsor should ensure oversight of any trial-related duties and functions carried out on its behalf, including trial-related duties and functions that are subcontracted to another party by the sponsor's CRO(s). Any trial-related duties and functions not specifically transferred to and assumed by a CRO are retained by the sponsor.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

Per the ZWE-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for selecting investigators according to the availability of adequate clinical trial environment facilities and resources. CTEthics indicates that the investigator’s competence is assessed mainly by technical competence, including research competence, which is evaluated in terms of education, knowledge, certification, and experience. Compassion and empathy are among the characteristics required of a technically competent researcher. In all cases, the principal investigator (PI) must be a Zimbabwean-based researcher that is a permanent resident in Zimbabwe. To add or change sites, the PI must apply to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) for authorization by submitting the form at ZWE-32.

The ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth state that the sponsor should ensure all the selected investigators have sufficient training, qualifications, and capability, including (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Qualified by education, training, and experience to assume responsibility for the proper conduct of the trial, provide evidence of such qualifications, and be licensed under the HProfAct
The PI should provide evidence of qualifications and experience through an up-to-date curriculum vitae, and must have had previous experience as a co-investigator in at least two (2) trials in the relevant professional area
The PI should ensure that sufficient time has been allocated to conduct and complete the trial within the agreed time period
Be thoroughly familiar with the characteristics and appropriate use of the investigational product (IP) as described in the protocol, current investigator’s brochure, product information, and other information sources
Have a clear understanding and willingness to obey the ethical and legal requirements of the trial
Will permit monitoring and auditing of the trial and inspection by the MCAZ or appointed representatives
Will keep a list of appropriately qualified persons to whom the investigator has delegated significant trial-related duties
Have no history of misconduct
Have practical experience within the relevant professional area, is a resident of Zimbabwe, and will be responsible for the conduct of the clinical trial at a clinical site
Had formal training in good clinical practice (GCP) within the last three (3) years
Per ZWE-41, the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) requires evidence of International Council for Harmonisation’s (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) training in the clinical trial application for PhD students and individual researchers

The CT-AppAuth and the ZWE-GCP state that with regard to the capacity of the clinical trial site, all clinical trials must be carried out under conditions that ensure adequate safety for the participants. The site selected should be appropriate to the stage of IP development and any potential risks involved. The trial site must have adequate facilities, including laboratories, equipment, and sufficient medical, paramedical, and clerical staff to support the trial and to deal with all reasonably foreseeable emergencies. A Clinical Research Site (CRS) facility should be clean, secure, and designed to ensure proper conduct of the clinical trial, as well as protect participants’ safety, privacy, and confidentiality. It should offer the following, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Hazard free entrance area and, if possible, handicap accessibility
Reception area where a participant can sign in/register and wait for CRS staff
Private setting(s) for informed consent discussions and counselling
Adequately equipped examination rooms to conduct study visits and procedures
Participant treatment area and/or post-treatment observation area
Adequate infection-control equipment and processes
Rest area, where participants can relax for example between pharmacokinetic sample collections
Injection and/or infusion rooms
Synchronized clocks throughout the clinic, laboratory, and pharmacy for studies involving time-critical processes between clinic and pharmacy or between clinic and laboratory
Access to a sink and safety equipment in the laboratory
Power back-up system to ensure continuity of electricity, internet connection, etc.
Adequate space for monitoring visits
Data management area
Office/workspace
Record storage area/room
Emergency facilities
Per the CT-AppAuth, for studies to be conducted at hospitals or medical institutions, proof of approval to use the facilities should be submitted. The CRS is required to have a process/procedure and facilities in place to handle any emergencies during a participant visit, including arrangements with a local emergency service to transport a participant quickly and provide treatment in the event of an emergency. For first in human clinical trials, the emergency facilities should be available onsite and an emergency trolley to assist with emergency situations. The emergency trolley should be kept sealed/locked when not in use, and staff should document periodic (monthly) content checks for expiration dates and replacement need. All laboratory assays must be validated, and principles of Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) should be observed. See the ZWE-GCP for additional details on adequate facilities, instruments, equipment, and supplies.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

Per CT-AppAuth, foreign researchers must apply for a research permit with the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ); they must also obtain RCZ approval to export biospecimens and/or materials. A foreign researcher is a non-Zimbabwean national and any person wishing to conduct research in Zimbabwe on behalf of a foreign institution, foreign organization, or other foreign person. As indicated in ProcForeignReg, foreign researchers should seek an institution of affiliation in the area of the intended research in Zimbabwe. If accepted by that institution, then the institution of affiliation in Zimbabwe forwards the application to the RCZ. Recognized institutions of affiliation are universities, government ministries, and government departments that run their own budgets, and whose head is an accounting officer, as well as any other publicly funded institutions as determined by the RCZ. Private and foreign institutions can have special collaborative arrangements with Zimbabwean public institutions.

ZWE-GCP states that a foreign sponsor (also called an external sponsor) has certain obligations when it conducts a clinical trial in Zimbabwe. The foreign sponsor should strengthen local capacity for ethical, scientific review, biomedical research, and provide healthcare services as described in ZWE-79. The foreign sponsor also has an ethical obligation to provide healthcare services that are essential to the safe conduct of the research and treatment of participants who suffer injury because of research intervention. In addition, the foreign sponsor should make the beneficial intervention or product developed as a result of the clinical trial reasonably available to the population or community concerned.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

CT-AppAuth requires that clinical trials set up a data and safety monitoring board (DSMB) or data monitoring committee. The sponsor must appoint members of a DSMB by considering a selection of individuals with relevant expertise (such as statisticians and clinicians), experience in clinical trials and in serving on other DSMBs, and absence of serious conflicts of interest. The PI must submit a DSMB charter with information on the aims and objectives, the composition, the names of the chairperson and members, and how meetings will be organized. DSMB and other types of safety reports in relation to the benefit/risk assessment of the study safety and subsequent protocol amendments or clarification memorandums should also be submitted to MCAZ via the Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-1).

Multicenter Studies

According to CTEthics, multicenter studies should be appropriate to the local setting and modifications should be made when required to suit the local conditions. It is unacceptable for developed-country participants to be offered better standards of care than are offered to Zimbabwean participants in a similar study. When Zimbabwe is chosen for a trial or study that has not been undertaken in the country of origin, the sponsor must explain the reasons why. In terms of study design, special attention should be paid to the sampling strategy. Other issues in international studies include financing of the study, the appropriateness of incentive packages to research participants, and remuneration packages for investigators. With multi-national clinical trials, the sponsor must ensure the following:

Benefits accrue to participants in the host country
The potential benefits of research considerably outweigh potential risks or harms to vulnerable individuals and communities
Research is non-exploitative and in the best interests of the research participants and their community
Groups already vulnerable are provided with improved access to research
Research participants are encouraged to participate in planning and conducting studies
Research in developing countries is linked to capacity-building in healthcare, and to economic and educational empowerment to promote the delivery of healthcare and progress generally in the host country
Honest efforts are made to translate research findings into components of accessible care in the community being researched
Conflicts of interest are avoided
Research protocols are modified to suit the situation in local communities
Publication of articles should be inclusive of investigators as authors from both host and sponsoring countries where appropriate contributions have been made
Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Insurance

Per the MSCAct, the MSC-Regs, and the ZWE-GCP, the sponsor must provide insurance cover for all trial participants. The coverage must include the costs of any trial-related injury and be adequate to cover those costs to resolution. The sponsor must provide insurance or should indemnify the investigator/institution against claims arising from the trial except for claims that arise from malpractice and/or negligence.

The ZWE-GCP further indicates that the sponsor must submit a certificate of insurance or a letter confirming such insurance cover and the amounts set aside or limits with the clinical trial application. The level of risk that participants will be exposed to will be different across phase I-IV trials and the type of clinical trial. The sponsor and principal investigator (PI) must provide insurance cover that will be adequate to match the risk involved in the clinical trial, but not less than $1,000 US dollars for each participant.

Compensation

In the case of external (foreign) sponsors, the ZWE-GCP imposes an ethical obligation to provide healthcare services that are essential to the safe conduct of the research, and the beneficial intervention or product developed as a result of the research reasonably available to the population or community concerned.

Injury or Death

Per the ZWE-GCP, all sponsors should establish policies and procedures that address the costs of treatment of trial participants in the event of trial-related injuries and provide insurance cover for all trial participants. There should be provisions for compensation/treatment in the case of injury or death of a participant and the extent to which participants may be rewarded/compensated for participation. Additionally, foreign sponsors have an ethical obligation to provide healthcare services that are essential to the treatment of participants who suffer injury because of research intervention.

Trial Participation

As specified in the ZWE-GCP, the participant should be informed of any prorated payment, if any, for participating in the trial. In the clinical trial application, all sponsors should explain the anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the participant and the anticipated expenses, if any, for participating in the trial. Per ZWE-49, the participant should be informed of any benefits that may reasonably be expected from the research, including if the benefit is expected to be primarily for others. Benefits may include money, free treatment, free medications, or free transportation. Money may be offered to reimburse expenses, time, inconvenience, and transportation. Money may not be used as an inducement to assume risks.

Post-Trial Access

The CT-AppAuth requires the PI to describe in the protocol the procedures put in place to ensure post-trial access for research participants who still need an intervention identified as beneficial in the trial. Only those participants who derive benefit from the investigational product will be considered. Benefit must be objective as well as significant to be clinically justifiable, and must be based on study endpoints, not only on investigator opinion. Post-trial access is not applicable for Phase I and II studies. However, it may be necessary for diseases such as cancer and/or rare diseases for which no other medicines or other standard of care is available. Follow-up studies or rollover studies may be proposed by the investigators to allow continued access to the medicines by participants until the product is registered or is available through the national program or any other approved means; these follow-up studies and rollover studies are considered as clinical trials and need to be approved and monitored by the MCAZ and ethics committees. Any other scenario is handled on a case-by-case basis by MCAZ.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ZWE-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance and quality control systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, documented (recorded), and reported in compliance with the protocol, good clinical practice (GCP), and the applicable regulatory requirement(s). The sponsor must secure agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial-related sites, source data/documents, and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. Quality control should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been processed correctly. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that incorporates critical process and data identification, risk identification, risk evaluation, risk control, risk communication, risk review, risk reporting, risk minimization measures, and risk management. See the ZWE-GCP for additional details on each of these risk elements.

CT-AppAuth states that the protocol should contain a description on how to maintain quality control and quality assurance of the study—such as criteria for selection of investigators, monitors, and the monitoring plan—which are in line with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZWE-73).

Per the ZWE-GCP, the sponsor must take prompt action to correct any noncompliance with the protocol, SOPs, GCP, and/or applicable regulatory requirement(s) by an investigator/institution, or by member(s) of the sponsor's staff. If noncompliance that significantly affects or has the potential to significantly affect human participant protection or reliability of trial results is discovered, the sponsor should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions.

Monitoring Requirements

Per ZWE-GCP, when performing an audit, the sponsor should consider the purpose of an audit, which is independent of and separate from routine monitoring or quality control functions. The audit is meant to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor should appoint individuals who are independent of the clinical trials/systems to conduct audits. The sponsor should ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience to conduct audits properly. The sponsor should ensure that the auditing of clinical trials/systems is conducted in accordance with the sponsor's written procedures on what to audit, how to audit, the frequency of audits, and the form and content of audit reports. The sponsor's audit plan and procedures for a trial audit should be guided by the importance of the trial submissions to regulatory authorities, the number of participants in the trial, the type and complexity of the trial, the level of risks to the trial participants, and any identified problem(s). The observations and findings of the auditor(s) should be documented. Regulatory authority(ies) may seek access to an audit report on a case-by-case basis when evidence of serious GCP non-compliance exists or in the course of legal proceedings. When required by applicable law or regulation, the sponsor should provide an audit certificate.

Per the ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, sponsors must develop a monitoring plan that is tailored to human participant protection and data integrity risks, describes the monitoring strategy and responsibilities of all parties, outlines the methods and rationale for their use, emphasizes critical data and processes, gives particular attention to aspects outside routine clinical practice that require additional training, and references the applicable policies and procedures. Monitoring should verify participant protection, data accuracy, and protocol/GCP compliance. The ZWE-GCP requires sponsors to use a systematic, risk-based approach to monitoring, combining on-site and centralized activities with a documented rationale. Monitors serve as the sponsor’s primary contact, ensuring informed consent, adequate facilities, trained staff, accurate case report forms, investigational product control, and proper reporting. Written monitoring reports must be submitted to sponsors and MCAZ, with the principal investigator providing monitoring reports in annual renewal applications.

See the GCP-Inspections for guidance on how MCAZ inspections are conducted. Also see ZWE-GCP for additional details on MCAZ inspections and ZWE-86 for an inspection checklist.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

Per the ZWE-GCP, if the monitoring and/or auditing identifies serious and/or persistent noncompliance on the part of an investigator/institution, the sponsor should terminate the investigator's/institution's participation in the trial. When an investigator's/institution's participation is terminated because of noncompliance, the sponsor should notify promptly the regulatory authority(ies). If a clinical trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor should promptly inform the investigators/institutions, the MCAZ, and the regulatory authority(ies) of the termination or suspension and the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. The ethics committee (EC) should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor or by the investigator/institution, as specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s).

The CTEthics states that researchers should inform the relevant institution(s), the review body(ies) that approved the research and, wherever possible, the research participants, if the research project is to be discontinued before the expected date of completion. For research at more than one (1) site, or research where there have been multiple ethical reviews, it must be clearly established, before the research begins, how this information will be communicated.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

As indicated in the ZWE-GCP, the clinical trial should use error-free data processing programs with adequate user documentation. Adequate security and protection should be provided in the computer system for the accuracy of the data entered into the database. Any printout of the data, as well as duplicates, must be signed and dated. Procedures for corrections made at data entry, as well as documentation of corrections in the audit records, should be provided for the electronic data processing and management system or for the network system for remote data entry. Standard operating procedures (SOPs) should be maintained for using electronic systems and cover system setup, installation, and use. The SOPs should describe system validation and functionality testing, data collection and handling, system maintenance, system security measures, change control, data backup, recovery, contingency planning, and decommissioning. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties on the use of computerized systems should be clear, and the users should be provided with training in the use of the systems. The SOPs should also clearly state those who have access to the electronic systems and timed maintenance of the electronic system.

Records Management

Per the ZWE-GCP, the investigator should maintain adequate and accurate source documents and trial records that include information on the use of a drug and all pertinent observations on each of the site’s trial participants. Source data should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, accurate, and complete. Clinical research sites must store clinical research records (CRRs) in a way that ensures privacy, confidentiality, security, and accessibility throughout the clinical trial. To ensure the files’ integrity in storage, CRRs must be stored in a location requiring authorized access. Use of a double-locking system is mandated. The following should also be considered as part of the storage facility to ensure the integrity of the files: fire extinguishers within or around the archives and use of a fire detection system; protection of the study records from water (rain/flood); pest control measures; use of temperature and humidity controls to avoid deterioration of files; and protection of electronic storage devices from degradation, erasure, deletion, or corruption. Source data should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, accurate, and complete. Changes to source data should be traceable, not obscure the original entry, and explained, if necessary (e.g., via an audit trail). The data storage and processing systems should record, store, and transfer the information obtained from the trial participants during the conduct of the trial, and enable retrospective validation and evaluation of the progress and conduct of the trial. With respect to blinded clinical trials, the blindness should be completely maintained from the generation of random codes for allocation of treatments to the time of decision for revelation of random codes.

Regarding record retention periods, the protocol, documents, case report forms, informed consent forms, and other trial-related documents should be retained for at least 10 years by the sponsor; the trial participants’ documents should be retained for at least 10 years by the institution. The participant identification codes should be retained by the investigator and the sponsor for at least 10 years.

Per the ZWE-GCP, all required records and their duplicates should be kept at the trial-related sites for the duration of the above-mentioned retention period and should always be available for inspection by the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ). The inspector should be allowed to photocopy or duplicate the records by other electronic and/or optical means. Upon request of the monitor, auditor, ethics committee (EC), or the MCAZ, the investigator/institution should make available for direct access all requested trial-related documents. The sponsor must keep all records related to the conduct of a clinical trial in a format that facilitates verification for the purpose of an inspection. If safety concerns arise, the sponsor must submit requested records within 48 hours. Additionally, the MCAZ can request the submission of additional information within seven (7) days to facilitate the inspection of a site.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Responsible Parties

As per the DPAct, the data controller is any natural person or legal person licensed by the data protection authority—the Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe (POTRAZ)—who determines the purpose and means of processing data. The data processor refers to a natural person or legal person, who processes data for and on behalf of the data controller.

The DPRegs states that any person whether alone or jointly with others, who determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data must apply for a data controller license from POTRAZ. A data controller license is valid for a period of 12 months subject to compliance with applicable laws and regulations. See the DPRegs for details and procedures on applying for a data processing license. The data controller must appoint a data protection officer (DPO) and notify POTRAZ in writing, using form DP2 specified in the Third Schedule of DPRegs. A data controller must:

Notify POTRAZ of any change to the DPO’s number, email address, and physical address within a period of 14 days of such change
Notify POTRAZ of the dismissal or resignation of a DPO in writing within 14 days of termination of the DPO’s contract
Appoint a DPO within 90 days from the date of promulgation of DPRegs or the date of termination of a DPO contract
Per the DPRegs, a DPO must have skills, qualifications, or experience in any of the following: data science, data analytics, information security systems, information systems audit, law, audit, or any other relevant qualification. Further, the DPO must have knowledge of national data protection laws and practices, and an understanding of the data controller’s business operations and processing activities. Every DPO must undergo a certification course approved by POTRAZ. See the G-DPO for additional guidance on the appointment, roles, responsibilities, training, and certification of DPOs.

Data Protection

As per the DPAct, any entity or person operating in Zimbabwe (and outside) must adhere to data protection and privacy principles when collecting data such as the personal information of clinical trial participants. Per the DPAct, data includes any representation of facts, concepts, information, whether in text, audio, video, images, machine-readable code or instructions, in a form suitable for communications, interpretation, or processing in a computer device, computer system, database, electronic communications network or related devices and includes a computer program and traffic data. Genetic data is any personal information stemming from a deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) analysis.

The DPAct states that the data controller must ensure that the processing of data is necessary and that the data is processed fairly and lawfully. The data should be collected for specified, explicit, and legitimate purposes, considering all relevant factors, especially the reasonable expectations of the data subject and the applicable legal and regulatory provisions. For the purposes of processing personal information under this section, the health professional and the health professional’s agents are held to principles of confidentiality. Every data controller or data processor must ensure that personal information is handled in the following manner:

Processed in accordance with the right to privacy of the data subject
Processed lawfully, fairly, and in a transparent manner in relation to any data subject
Collected for explicit, specified, and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a manner incompatible with those purposes, as well as adequate, relevant, and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which it is processed
Collected only where a valid explanation is provided whenever information relating to family or private affairs is required
Is accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date, with every reasonable step being taken to ensure that any inaccurate personal data is erased or rectified without delay
Kept in a form that identifies the data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposes for which it was collected
The DPRegs stipulates that personal data must be processed securely by means of appropriate technical and organizational measures, which include risk assessments, development and implementation of organizational policies, and implementation of appropriate physical and technical measures during all data phases. Controllers and processors may put in place additional measures about the security of processing depending on the circumstances and risk posed by the processing. The measures must ensure the security, confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the controllers’ systems and services and the personal data being processed. Further, the measures must enable the data controller or data processor to restore access and availability of personal data in a timely manner in the event of a physical or technical incident. The data controller or data processor must ensure that there are appropriate processes in place to test the effectiveness of the security measures, and to undertake any required improvements. A data controller must report personal data breaches to the POTRAZ within 24 hours of becoming aware of the breach by submitting form DP3 (Data Breach Notification Form) specified in the Fourth Schedule of the DPRegs. Where the detected breach is likely to result in a high risk of adversely affecting individuals’ rights and freedoms, the controller must also inform those data subjects within 72 hours. See DPRegs for additional details.

Per the G-DPO, the DPO has the following duties to protect personal data:

Ensure compliance by the data controller with the provisions of the DPAct, regulations, notices, directives, and guidelines
Handle requests made to the data controller by POTRAZ pursuant to the DPAct
Inform and advise the employees about their obligations to comply with the DPAct and other data protection directives and notices
Monitor compliance with the DPAct and other data protection laws, and with organizational data protection polices, including managing internal data protection
Raise awareness of data protection issues, training staff, and conducting internal audits
Advise on and monitor data protection impact assessments
Report and cooperate with the POTRAZ in cases of data breaches
Serve as the first point of contact with the POTRAZ, and for data subjects in cases of data breaches or data subject access requests
Regarding trans-border flow of data, the DPAct states that the transfer of personal information by a data controller to a third party in a foreign country is prohibited unless an adequate level of protection is ensured in the recipient country or international organization. If an adequate level of protection is not assured, the transfer of such information is permissible where one (1) of the following instances takes place:

The data subject has unambiguously given their consent to the proposed transfer
The transfer is necessary for the performance of a contract between the data subject and the controller or the implementation of pre-contractual measures taken in response to the data subject's request
The transfer is necessary for the conclusion or performance of a contract concluded or to be concluded between the controller and a third party in the interest of the data subject
The transfer is necessary or legally required on important public interest grounds, or for the establishment, exercise, or defense of legal claims
The transfer is necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject
The transfer is made from a legal register, which is intended to provide information to the public and is open to consultation either by the public in general or by any person who can demonstrate a legitimate interest
See the DPAct for additional details, including on submittal and authorization from the data protection authority, consent requirements, and controller and processor responsibilities.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

The DPAct states that consent to processing personal data refers to any manifestation of specific unequivocal, freely given, informed expression of will by which the data subject or the legal representative accepts that their data be processed. For non-sensitive data, personal information may only be processed if the data subject consents to the processing of such data, which may be implied where the data subject is an adult natural person or has a legal persona and has full legal capacity to consent. See the DPAct for details on when the processing of non-sensitive data is permitted without the consent of the data subject. Regarding sensitive information, the data controller must not process sensitive data unless the data subject has given consent in writing. The consent to the processing of sensitive data may be withdrawn by the data subject at any time and without any explanation and free of charge. POTRAZ determines the circumstances when the prohibition to process sensitive data cannot be lifted even with the data subject’s consent (taking into account the factors surrounding the prohibition and the reasons for collecting the data). The processing of genetic, biometric sensitive, and health data is prohibited, unless the data subject has given consent in writing, which can be withdrawn by the data subject at any time without any reasons and free of charge. Health data may only be processed under the responsibility of a healthcare professional, except if the data subject has given written consent, or if the processing is necessary for the prevention of imminent danger, or for the mitigation of a specific criminal offence. See the DPAct for additional details on when processing of genetic, biometric sensitive, and health data may be processed without consent.

Per the DPRegs, a data controller must not make a decision based solely on automated processing when it affects a data subject, unless the decision was consented to by the data subject or allowed by law.

Consent for Processing Personal Data of Children

Per the DPAct, where the data subject is a child, their rights under the DPAct may be exercised by the parent or legal guardian(s). The DPRegs states that children’s personal information must not be processed without the consent of the parent/legal guardian of the child involved. Any data controller processing personal information of children must make reasonable efforts to verify that consent is given or authorized by the parent/legal guardian of the child, taking into consideration available technology.

Consent for Processing Personal Data of Physically, Mentally, or Legally Incapacitated People

Per the DPAct and the DPRegs, where the data subject is an adult that is physically, mentally, or legally incapable of exercising their rights under the DPAct, a legal representative/guardian may exercise such rights, or as provided by law or as designated by a court of competent jurisdiction.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Zimbabwean clinical trials, a freely given informed consent must be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the MSCAct, the ZWE-GCP, the CTEthics, and the Declaration of Helsinki (ZWE-70). As per the ZWE-GCP and the CTEthics, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed by the institutional ethics committee (EC) and national EC, the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ), for approval with the clinical trial application. The MSC-Regs requires that the participant’s consent is documented in the ICF (ZWE-30) when submitting the application to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ).

To obtain consent, the ZWE-GCP and the CTEthics require that information is given in both oral and written form whenever possible. The language used in the oral and written consent information about the clinical trial should be as non-technical as practical and should be understandable to the participant or legal representative/guardian. No participant should be coerced or unduly influenced to participate or continue to participate in a trial. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be given ample opportunity to enquire about the details of the trial and be allowed sufficient time to decide whether they wish to participate. The information should make clear that refusal to participate or withdrawal from the trial at any stage is without any disadvantages for the person’s subsequent care. ZWE-49 and ZWE-50 state that the language used in the ICF should be non-coercive and written at a 6th grade reading level, medical jargon or technical terms should be avoided (or be followed by a description in lay terms), initials and/or abbreviations should be explained, and sentences should be short and concise. The ZWE-GCP indicates that none of the information concerning the trial should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or appear to waive any legal rights or that releases or appears to release the investigator and/or sponsor from liability for negligence. See ZWE-49 and ZWE-50 for additional instruction and templates for researchers and institutional ECs on preparing ICFs for adult participants and legal representatives/guardians. ZWE-57 provides a sample ICF for the long-term storage and future use of specimens. (See the Consent for Specimen section for more information.)

The CTEthics additionally indicates that informed consent means a participant has been informed about the risks and benefits of the research, understands such risks and benefits, and is able to give consent to participate without coercion, undue influence, or inappropriate incentives. Researchers must be particularly aware of the vulnerability of prospective participants in terms of access to health services and education levels.

Re-Consent

Per the ZWE-GCP, the written ICF and any other written information for participants should be revised whenever important new information becomes available that may be relevant to consent. Any revised written ICF and written information must be submitted to the MRCZ and the MCAZ for approval in advance of use. The participant or legal representative/guardian must be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that might be relevant to their willingness to continue participation in the trial. The communication of this information should be documented.

Language Requirements

Per the ZWE-GCP and ZWE-49, both the English and vernacular versions (e.g., Shona/Ndebele) must be used in consent materials. Evidence of back translation and who performed the translation is required.

The Trslt-Ntc requires foreign researchers to use qualified translation institutions for translation of research materials. All translated research materials should be accompanied by a confirmation from a qualified translation institution. See ZWE-5 for a list of qualified language institutions.

Documenting Consent

Per the ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, prior to participation in a clinical trial, the written ICF should be signed and personally dated by the participant. Informed consent is documented using a written consent form approved by the EC and signed and dated by the participant or the participant’s legally authorized representative at the time of consent. According to the ZWE-GCP, if the potential participant is illiterate), an impartial witness must observe the entire informed consent process for each ICF administered. A copy of the signed and dated consent form must be given to the person signing for the participant and another copy retained in study files. CT-AppAuth states that the investigator should ensure the signature(s) and date(s) occur as required. Version-controlled and dated English and vernacular ICFs should be provided with the clinical trial application and be in line with MRCZ guidelines and templates, as provided in ZWE-49, ZWE-50, and ZWE-57.

Waiver of Consent

CTEthics requires that informed consent must be obtained from research participants before the research can begin, unless there are good reasons to the contrary, such as a coma, emergency, or mental incapacity. Prior approval of the EC must be obtained in all situations in which it is justifiable to initiate research without the informed consent of the participant.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Per the ZWE-GCP and the CTEthics, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The clinical trial involves research and its purpose
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
The trial procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The participant’s responsibilities
Those aspects of the trial that are experimental
The reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant and, when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
The reasonably expected benefits; when there is no intended clinical benefit to the participant, the participant should be made aware of this
The alternative procedure(s) or course(s) of treatment that may be available to the participant, and their important potential benefits and risks
The compensation and/or treatment available to the participant in the event of trial-related injury
The anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
The anticipated expenses, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
The participant’s participation in the trial is voluntary and the participant may refuse to participate or withdraw from the trial, at any time
The participants’ identity will remain confidential whether results of the trial are published or not published
The Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) and other authorized persons will be granted direct access to the participants’ original medical records for verification of trial procedures and data
Should any new information that is relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participating in the trial become available, it will be conveyed to them in a timely manner
The contact persons for further information about the trial or whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
The participant may be requested to terminate participation in the trial
The expected duration of the trial
The approximate number of participants involved in the trial
The investigators’ qualifications
Statement that the research has been approved by an ethics committee
Contact details of research ethics committee representatives
In addition, see ZWE-30, ZWE-49, and ZWE-50 for additional MCAZ and Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) instruction and templates on preparing ICFs for adult participants and legal representatives/guardians. ZWE-57 provides a sample ICF for the long-term storage and future use of specimens. (See the Consent for Specimen section for more information.)

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the ZWE-GCP, Zimbabwe’s ethical standards promote assurance that the rights, safety, and well-being of participants are protected, are consistent with the principles in the Declaration of Helsinki (ZWE-70), and that clinical trial data are credible. The CTEthics further states that the ethical principles for health research in Zimbabwe promote good, desirable, and acceptable conduct to protect the welfare and rights of research participants, and to reflect the basic ethical values of beneficence, justice, and respect for persons.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As stated in the CTEthics, potential participants must be assured that participation is voluntary, and that refusal to participate, or a decision to discontinue participation, will not involve any form of penalty. Further, the selection, recruitment, exclusion, and inclusion of research participants must be just and fair, based on sound scientific and ethical principles. No person may be inappropriately or unjustly excluded based on race, age, sex, sexual orientation, disability, education, religious beliefs, pregnancy, marital status, ethnic or social origin, conscience, belief, or language.

Per the ZWE-GCP, the informed consent discussion and written consent material should include an explanation that participation in the trial is voluntary and the participant may refuse to participate or withdraw from the trial, at any time.

The Right to Information

Per the CTEthics and the ZWE-GCP, potential research participants or legal representatives/guardians have the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation or treatment in the case of injury, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

CTEthics states that privacy is concerned with access to personal records, and confidentiality refers to the use of personal information once it has been disclosed. A participant’s right to both privacy and confidentiality must be protected. The researcher must ensure that where personal information about research participants or a community is collected, stored, used, or destroyed, this is done in ways that respect the privacy or confidentiality of the participants or the community, and any agreements made with the participants or community.

Per the ZWE-GCP, the informed consent discussion and written consent material should include an explanation that the participants’ identity will remain confidential whether results of the trial are published or not. They should also be informed that the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) and other authorized persons will be granted direct access to the participants’ original medical records for verification of trial procedures and data.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

Per the CTEthics and the ZWE-GCP, the informed consent discussion and written consent material should include an explanation that the research participant or legal representative/guardian will be provided with contact information for the investigator(s) and the ethics committee (EC) to address trial-related inquiries and/or address any questions.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

Per the CTEthics and the ZWE-GCP, the rights, safety, and well-being of the trial participants are the most important considerations and should prevail over the interests of science and society.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
As indicated in the CTEthics, written and verbal informed consent must be obtained, unless there are good reasons to the contrary, such as an emergency.

Per CT-AppAuth, if Zimbabwe has been declared to be in a public health emergency disaster by the President or Minister of Health, the World Health Organization (WHO), or any other designated person, an expedited regulatory review pathway for clinical trials will be implemented in line with ZWE-75. The emergency procedures implemented by the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) and the national ethics committee (EC), the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ), in coordination with the African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF) involves accelerated procedures, including EC review of consent. (See the Submission Process and Timeline of Review sections for additional details.)

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

The CTEthics states that in Zimbabwe, researchers must be particularly aware of the vulnerability of prospective participants in terms of access to health services and education levels. Ethics committees (ECs) should be especially vigilant when considering research proposals involving vulnerable populations, including children, pregnant and nursing women, persons with mental illnesses or handicaps, members of communities unfamiliar with medical concepts, and persons with restricted freedom, such as prisoners. If a participant lacks capacity to exercise an informed choice to participate, an appropriate person to make the choice for them must be identified by the investigator.

In addition, the ZWE-GCP identifies individuals as vulnerable who may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation, or of a retaliatory response from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate. For example, members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable participants include patients with incurable diseases, persons in nursing homes, unemployed or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
ZWE-49 indicates that the age of majority in Zimbabwe is 18. Children under 18 years of age have not attained the legal age for consent to treatments or to participate in a clinical trial. Children who are seven (7) to 17 years of age can give assent through a written affirmative agreement to participate in a clinical trial. As per ZWE-50, when the research participant is a child under seven (7) years of age, the informed consent form (ICF) must be signed by the child’s parent/legal guardian. For children who are seven (7) to 17 years of age, the consent and assent requirements vary and are provided below. In addition, the ICF must include signatures in the appropriate sections if the study involves specimen collection and/or recording the child with photographs, video, or audio.

Assent Requirements

Per ZWE-11, assent means a child’s affirmative agreement to participate in research. Mere failure to object should not, absent affirmative agreement, be construed as assent. This means the child must actively show a willingness to participate in the research, rather than just complying with directions to participate and not resisting. The Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) has the discretion to judge children’s capacity to assent to be involved in a proposed research activity, or on an individual basis. The MRCZ considers the nature of the proposed research activity and the ages, maturity, and psychological state of the children involved when judging whether children are capable of assent, and also reviews the proposed assent procedure and the form and content of the information conveyed to the prospective participants. For research activities involving adolescents whose capacity to understand resembles that of adults, the assent procedure should likewise include information like what would be provided for informed consent by adults or for parental permission. For children whose age and maturity level limits their ability to fully comprehend the nature of the research activity, but who are still capable of being consulted about participation in research, it may be appropriate to focus on conveying an accurate picture of what the actual experience of participation in research is likely to be (for example, what the experience will be, how long it will take, whether it might involve any pain or discomfort). The assent procedure should reflect a reasonable effort to enable the child to understand, to the degree they are capable, what their participation in research would involve.

Per ZWE-11, a child’s assent is required, except in the following three (3) circumstances:

The capability of some or all children is so limited that they cannot reasonably be consulted
The intervention or procedure involved in the research holds out the prospect of direct benefit to the health or well-being of the children and is available only in the context of the research
The research meets the same conditions as those for waiver or alteration of informed consent in research involving adults
Per ZWE-11, the MRCZ determines the appropriate manner of documenting child assent. Based on such considerations as the child’s age, maturity, and degree of literacy, the committee decides what form of documentation, if any, is most appropriate. If adolescents are involved in research where a consent form would have been used if the participants were adults, it would generally be appropriate to use a similar form to document an adolescent’s assent. If young children are involved who cannot read, documentation should use a form that is appropriate for the purpose of recording that assent took place. The MRCZ may also decide that documentation of assent is not warranted. Finally, the MRCZ views informed consent as an ongoing process throughout the duration of a research study. When a child who was enrolled in research with parental or guardian permission subsequently reaches the legal age of consent, the participant is no longer regulated by the requirements regarding parental or guardian permission and child assent. Unless the MRCZ determines that the requirements for obtaining informed consent can be waived, the investigator should seek and obtain the legally effective informed consent, for the now-adult participant for any ongoing interactions or interventions with the participant.

As per ZWE-50, for children who are seven (7) to 17 years of age, a distinction is made between therapeutic and non-therapeutic research. For non-therapeutic research, the child’s parent/legal guardian must sign the ICF and a separate assent form must be signed by the child. For therapeutic research, the child’s parent/legal guardian must sign the ICF, and the child’s assent should be obtained with the child signing a separate assent form or with a single paragraph in the ICF that states, “I have discussed this clinical research study with the child using language which is understandable and appropriate. I believe I have fully informed this participant of the nature of the study and its possible risks and benefits. I believe the participant understood this explanation and assented to participate in this study.” This statement should be signed by the physician/investigator and by a witness. In circumstances when a specific child is not capable of providing assent and the prospect of therapeutic benefit is great, a request may be made to the ethics committee to waive consent. For children who are 13 to 17 years of age, a separate assent should be signed and dated by the child participant.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Per the ZWE-GCP, the informed consent form and other written material given to the participant must include an explanation of the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant, as applicable.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
The CTEthics points to the involvement of prisoners as a situation that calls for careful scrutiny. The principle of respect for persons requires that prisoners not be deprived of the opportunity to volunteer for research. However, under prison conditions they may be subtly coerced or unduly influenced to engage in research activities for which they would not otherwise volunteer. Respect for persons would then dictate that prisoners be protected. Those involved in clinical research need to balance the competing considerations.

Per ZWE-11, if a participant involved in ongoing research that was approved by the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) becomes a prisoner during the study, the researcher must promptly notify the MRCZ for re-review of the protocol. All research interactions and interventions with, and obtaining identifiable private information about, the now-incarcerated participant must be suspended. In special circumstances in which the investigator asserts that it is in the best interests of the participant to remain in the research study while incarcerated, the participant may continue to participate in the research.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
The CTEthics states that in Zimbabwe, ethics committees (ECs) should be especially vigilant when considering research proposals involving vulnerable populations, including persons with mental illnesses or handicaps.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
According to the ZWE-GCP, an investigational product is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial including a product with a marketing authorization when used or assembled in a way different from the approved form, or when used for an unapproved indication or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Note: The ZWE-GCP states it should be read in conjunction with other International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) guidelines (ZWE-80) that are relevant to the pharmaceutical development of investigational products.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Manufacturing

As specified in the MSCAct, the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) authorizes the manufacture of medicines in Zimbabwe. Per the ZWE-GCP, the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) is subject to the same regulatory controls as marketed medicines. Furthermore, MSCAct and MSC-Regs specify that a premise license must be obtained from the MCAZ to manufacture medicines in the country. To apply for a license, the application form (ZWE-29), fees, and accompanying materials should be submitted to the Director General of MCAZ. To renew a license for a manufacturing premises, ZWE-2 indicates that requests to renew can also be made via the MCAZ Online Services Portal (also called the Zimbabwe Drug Information System (ZIMDIS)) (ZWE-82). As indicated in ZWE-15, the MCAZ Online Services Portal (ZWE-82) should be used for new applications and renewals. See ZWE-68 for more information on MCAZ licensing.

See the Regulatory Fees section for details on license fees for a manufacturer’s premises.

Per the ZWE-GCP, IPs should be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP), and they should be used in accordance with the approved protocol. The sponsor should ensure that the IPs (including active comparator(s) and placebo) are manufactured in accordance with GMP. The manufacturing of IPs is subject to control and inspection by the MCAZ, and certificates of analysis (COAs) must be provided for all IPs and comparator products. Chemistry and manufacturing information provided in the clinical trial application should be presented in a concise manner. If the pharmaceutical or chemical properties of the IP have been altered compared to those in use during animal testing or previous clinical trials, such alterations must be described and justified. Pharmaceutical and/or chemical alterations in an IP that is used in an ongoing clinical trial, and that may affect the quality, safety, and/or efficacy of the IP must immediately be reported to the MCAZ. If the composition of the medicinal product is altered, additional bioavailability or bioequivalence studies may be required.

As stated in the CT-AppAuth, the investigator’s brochure (IB) must contain proof of current GMP compliance at the manufacturing site(s). The IB should also contain documentation on quality and manufacturing of the IP (i.e., the IP dossier); stability data for initial batches, COAs for three (3) batches or batch analysis data for three (3) batches; and the name and address of the manufacturer(s) or manufacturing licenses. More details are provided in the International Council for Harmonisation’s (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZWE-73) and may be used when compiling information on this part. For MCAZ-registered medicinal products included in the clinical trial, the following documentation should be provided: generic and brand name (if any) of the product; product registration number and a current Package Insert or summary of product characteristics of the product; COA; and current GMP certificate from a national regulatory authority. For products that are approved by other regulatory authorities, such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), European Medicines Agency (EMA), the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), the World Health Organization (WHO) listed authorities, etc., and products that are prequalified by the WHO , proof of such approval should be submitted to the MCAZ, including current GMP certificates. In addition, certification of GMP compliance of manufacturing sites of the IPs, adjuvants, comparators, and placebos must be provided to the MCAZ. The amount and depth of information that would be submitted to the MCAZ depends on the clinical trial phase, novelty of the medicine, dosage form/route of administration, and the known or suspected risks. See the CT-AppAuth for the specific requirements on the chemistry and manufacturing requirements to be included in the IP dossier with the clinical trial application.

Import

The Sec75-Imports and ZWE-81 indicate that institutions that may apply for importation of IPs (referred to as “unregistered medicines” in the import requirements) under the exemption provisions of Section 75 of the MSCAct. Per the Pharm-IMPs and ZWE-68, the MCAZ must approve import permits for all IPs and other trial-related medical products. As delineated in the Pharm-IMPs, to import IPs, applicants are required to apply for authorization to the MCAZ by submitting the following:

A cover letter stating the full name and address of the innovator and/or manufacturer, the study sponsor, the recognized clinical research entity, the name/description of the IP, placebo, quantity to be imported, batch number, and shelf life of each IP to be imported
The quantity and source of each IP and trial-related products to be imported
Shipment documents and invoices of the IP purchased/to be purchased indicating quantities
A COA of IPs for all batches of each product to be imported
Lot release certificate(s) (where applicable) for all batches to be imported
Proof of payment of the appropriate fee
Per the Pharm-IMPs, applications can be submitted via email to mcaz@mcaz.co.zw and pvct@mcaz.co.zw using the Section 75 application tab on the Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-1) for the relevant clinical trial, or submitted as a hard copy to MCAZ at 106 Baines Avenue, Harare. Note that to import registered medicines for a clinical trial, the requirements in the MSC-ImportExport must be followed. The MCAZ will process an application for an import permit within five (5) working days. Incomplete applications will be rejected and the applicant will be required to resubmit a complete new application for authorization to import the IPs, including proof of payment of the appropriate fee.

Please note: Zimbabwe is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (ZWE-91) which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see ZWE-92.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

As specified in the ZWE-GCP, the sponsor must maintain a copy of all versions of the investigator’s brochure (IB) for the investigational product (IP), as well as records regarding each change made to the IB and the rationale and supporting documentation for each change. Per the ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, the IB must provide coverage of the following areas, each with literature references where appropriate (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Table of Contents
A brief summary (preferably not exceeding two (2) pages), highlighting the significant physical, chemical, pharmaceutical, pharmacological, toxicological, pharmacokinetic, metabolic, and clinical information available that is relevant to the stage of clinical development of the IP
A brief introductory statement containing the chemical name of the IP(s); all active ingredients; the IP(s) pharmacological class and its expected position within this class (e.g., advantages); the rationale for performing research with the IP(s); the anticipated prophylactic, therapeutic, or diagnostic indication(s); and the general approach to be followed in evaluating the IP
Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation
Nonclinical studies information
The pharmacological aspects including its metabolism in all animal species tested, and the toxicological effects in any animal species tested under a single dose study, a repeated dose study or a special study, etc.
Results of clinical pharmacokinetic studies
Effects in humans, including information regarding safety, pharmacodynamics, efficacy, and dose responses
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator
Proof of current good manufacturing practice (GMP) showing compliance of the IP manufacturing site(s) and documentation on quality and manufacturing of the IP (IP dossier)
Stability data for initial batches, certificates of analysis (COAs) for three (3) batches or batch analysis data for three (3) batches
Name and address of the manufacturer(s) or manufacturing licenses
Quality Management

Per the ZWE-GCP, COAs must be provided for all investigational and comparator products that are used in clinical trials. Further, IPs should be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable GMP. As per CT-AppAuth, for products that are approved by other regulatory authorities, such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), European Medicines Agency (EMA), the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), and the World Health Organization (WHO) listed authorities, etc., and products that are prequalified by WHO, proof of such approval should be submitted to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ). In addition, the CT-AppAuth indicates that certification of GMP compliance of manufacturing sites of the IPs, adjuvants, comparators, and placebos must be provided to the MCAZ.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Zimbabwe must comply with the requirements set forth in the ZWE-GCP and the Pharm-IMPs. Per ZWE-GCP, the sponsor should ensure that the IPs (including active comparator(s) and placebo) are adequately packed and labelled in a manner that protects the blinding (if applicable) and for clinical trial use only. In addition, the labelling should comply with the protocol. Per the Pharm-IMPs, study products must be labelled properly to ensure their safe administration and use by the research staff and participants and in a format that complies with all applicable requirements and maintains participant confidentiality. It is the site pharmacists’ responsibility to know the requirements for their jurisdiction. Prescription labels for study products should be distinguishable from other labels by an appropriate legend. According to the ZWE-GCP and the Pharm-IMPs, study labels should include the following information (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

A statement indicating that the drug is an IP and should only be used by a qualified investigator
The name, number, or identifying mark of the drug
Participant name or coded identification
The dispensing date and expiration date of the drug
Directions for dispensing the product, including the dosage if applicable
Instructions should be provided to the participant and/or the appropriate nursing service personnel if they advise the participant on the correct use of the study product
Number of dosing units dispensed
The recommended storage conditions for the drug
The batch/lot number of the drug
The name and address of the sponsor and prescribing investigator’s name
The protocol code or IP identification number
The trial name or study identification number
Name, address, and phone number of the dispensing site
According to the Pharm-IMPs, if a study product is mailed to a participant, it must be labelled properly, and receipt by the participant must be documented.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

Per the ZWE-GCP, the sponsor should provide an up-to-date investigator’s brochure (IB) to the investigator. The sponsor is also responsible for determining the acceptable storage temperatures and conditions, storage times, reconstitution fluids, and procedures for product infusion for the investigational products (IPs), if applicable. The investigator should be thoroughly familiar with the characteristics and appropriate use of the IP as described in the protocol, the current IB, the product information, and other information sources. Investigators in the trial should provide information on restrictions on the uses of the IP in any country. In addition, the Pharm-IMPs states that the principal investigator (PI) and/or investigator has the overall responsibility for all the medical products and IPs for the study. The pharmacist at each site participating in a clinical trial, who is designated as the pharmacist of record, is the primary individual who is expected to develop and maintain a study product management system, which includes the technical procedures for study product ordering, control, dispensing, and accountability. Their specific responsibilities are delineated in the Pharm-IMPs. The ZWE-GCP indicates that generally IPs used in clinical trials should be handled in the same way as registered medicines. The CT-AppAuth stipulates that leftover, expired, used, or broken IPs may be destroyed upon authorization by the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) and the study sponsor. An official request to dispose of the IPs, indicating the type, quantity of each product to be destroyed, and the method of destruction must be made to the MCAZ. The destruction certificate/letter confirming destruction must be submitted to the MCAZ. For more information on the destruction of IPs, see the Pharm-IMPs.

Record Requirements

As indicated in the ZWE-GCP, the records on IPs should document quantities, delivery, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction. The investigator should not provide the IPs to any individuals who are not trial participants. The sponsor should retain the batch samples of the IPs until at least two (2) years after the approval of a marketing application or after the conclusion of the clinical trial for an unapproved marketing application.

Per Pharm-IMPs, the pharmacist of record is responsible for ordering and maintaining records related to the receipt of protocol-provided study products, dispensing to participants, and disposition of study products. The pharmacist of record also maintains records of any trial-related products (including records for study medicines that are not provided as part of the protocol) received directly from other sources including adequate records showing the receipt, dispensing, dates, and quantities of the medicines. A copy of all records for study products should be retained, including records such as order forms, receipts for transfers and returns, packing slips, inventory, and accountability records. Trial-related records and any other unique pharmacy records should be retained until two (2) years after the investigation of the study product is discontinued. Accountability records and any other unique pharmacy information may be archived with case report forms after the protocol database is closed and the study is unblinded, if applicable. Pharmacy records and case report forms should be archived together. When archiving, pharmacy records should be placed in a folder or envelope and clearly marked as pharmacy records. The records should be available for inspection and copying by an authorized employee or representative/inspector of the regulatory authorities, upon request.

Also see the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ)’s form (ZWE-52) for documenting trial-related materials.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
The CTEthics defines human tissue as the substance, structure, and texture of which the human body or any part or organ of it is composed, which is removed or separated from a living human being and includes blood, blood components, and waste products. Genetic material is any source of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) or ribonucleic acid (RNA) that can be tested to obtain genetic information. It includes cells, whether as single cells or as part of tissues, and extracted DNA and RNA.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Import

No information is currently available related to the import of specimens.

Export

According to the CT-AppAuth, researchers must obtain approval from the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ) to export biospecimens and/or materials. Per ProcForeignReg, foreign researchers’ application to the RCZ for a research permit must include the completed specimens transfer agreement (STA) form (ZWE-63) for the shipment of specimens and the materials transfer agreement form (ZWE-62) for shipment of non-biological specimens. As indicated in ProcForeignReg, Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) approval is a prerequisite for RCZ consideration of a research permit application for shipment of biospecimens. Per ZWE-89, the MRCZ will forward the application for registration of a foreign researcher to the RCZ. The applicant must prepare 10 flat files, with each document in all 10 files clearly labeled. Of the 10 copies, eight (8) are for the RCZ, one (1) is for the MRCZ, and one (1) is for the applicant. Both the MRCZ and the RCZ must sign ZWE-89 and receive a copy of it. Per ZWE-89, 10 copies of the following documents must be included:

The principal investigator (PI) application letter
The MRCZ cover letter
The valid MRCZ approval letter
The valid RCZ registration certificate if the study is registered
The STA form (ZWE-63)
The study summary
The study protocol
The informed consent forms in English and Shona
The applicant’s good clinical practice (GCP) certificate
In addition, per ZWE-89, the application must include a stated finite date of destruction of leftover biospecimens, with a commitment to avail a copy of the record of destruction within two (2) months of this date.

Per G-RegForeignStud, any experimental tests, analyses, and investigational procedures on biospecimens and/or materials should be undertaken within Zimbabwe. However, where it is proven that no capacity for a particular test, analysis, and investigation of a biospecimen and/or material exists in Zimbabwe, or where exchange is needed for quality assurance purposes, the researcher must obtain approval from the RCZ to export the biospecimens and/or materials for research. The applicant must complete an STA form signed by the researcher and the recipient institution abroad.

Per ProcForeignReg and G-RegForeignStud, to export a biospecimen and/or material for research purposes, the researcher must complete an STA (ZWE-63) signed by the researcher and the recipient institution abroad. Type and quantities of specimens to be shipped, tests to be conducted, and justification for shipping to a foreign lab must be indicated on the STA annex form before submission to the RCZ. As indicated in ZWE-20, researchers exporting biospecimens out of Zimbabwe must provide the RCZ with a record of destruction of leftover biospecimens within two (2) months from the proposed date of destruction. The STA (ZWE-63) must state a destruction date and commit to completing the destruction when applying to export biospecimens.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
In accordance with ZWE-57, investigators must obtain informed consent from clinical trial participants for the long-term storage and future use of specimens. The informed consent form (ICF) (ZWE-57) indicates participants must be informed that specimens will be collected for the laboratory tests described in the ICF that was signed to join the clinical trial. The following elements should be included in the specimens ICF:

Information about the collection, storage, and future use of leftover samples
Written permission to have leftover samples stored after the study has ended and used for future studies
Participation is voluntary and participants may choose not to have any samples stored other than what is needed to complete the study and still be in this research study or any future study
How the samples will be used in future research (e.g., DNA analysis or developing new diagnostic tests)
Study researchers will not contact the participant or the participant’s regular doctor with any results from tests done on the participant’s stored samples; if, in the very rare case that a specific test result gives important health information, the researchers will tell the study staff and the study staff will try to contact the participant
Samples will not be sold or used directly to produce commercial products
Research studies that want to use leftover samples must be reviewed and approved by the sponsors’ ethics committee (EC) and the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ)
Each sample will be tested immediately for the tests mentioned in the study’s consent form, and the amount left over will be stored for future use
The name of the storage facility and laboratory where the specimens will be stored safely and securely in Zimbabwe
Only the people who work at the facility and approved researchers will have access to the samples, and they will not have any information that identifies the participant
There is no limit on duration of the long-term storage
In the future, any researcher who wants to use the samples for a new study must get approval from the MRCZ and the principal investigator
If the samples are used for future studies outside of Zimbabwe, only enough of the sample will be shipped to complete the tests required
Risks and benefits
The donor’s information will be kept private with coded and traceable labels and study staff are required to keep personal information confidential
Per ZWE-57, for more information about storage of specimens, inquiries should be sent to the MRCZ:

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
Cnr Mazoe Street/ Josiah Tongogara Avenue
Harare, Zimbabwe
Phone: +263 4 791792, 791193
Mobile: 0784 956 128

Requirements
(Legislation) Data Protection Act [Chapter 11:22] (DPAct) (December 3, 2021)
Parliament
(Legislation) Health Professions Act [Chapter 27:19] (HProfAct) (Amended through December 31, 2017)
Parliament
(Legislation) Medicines and Allied Substances Control Act of 1969 [Chapter 15:03] (MSCAct) (Amended through December 31, 2017)
Parliament
(Legislation) National Biotechnology Authority Act [Chapter 14:31] (BioTechAct) (Amended through December 31, 2017)
Parliament
(Legislation) Research Act [Chapter 10:22] (ResearchAct) (Amended through December 31, 2017)
Parliament
(Regulation) Cyber and Data Protection (Licensing of Data Controllers and Appointment of Data Protection Officers) Regulations, 2024 (DPRegs) (Effective September 13, 2024)
Government of Zimbabwe
(Regulation) Medicines and Allied Substances Control (General) Regulations, 1991 (MSC-Regs) (Amended through August 7, 1998)
Government of Zimbabwe
(Regulation) Medicines and Allied Substances Control (Import and Export of Medicines) Regulations, 2008 (MSC-ImportExport) (Effective July 1, 2008)
Ministry of Health and Child Welfare
(Guidance) Cyber and Data Protection Implementation Guidelines on Appointment, Roles, Responsibilities, Training and Certification of Data Protection Officers (G-DPO) (Effective November 13, 2024)
Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Ethics Guidelines for Health Research Involving Human Participants in Zimbabwe (CTEthics) (Version 1.4) (September 30, 2011)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Guidelines for Clinical Trial Application and Authorization in Zimbabwe (MCAZ-PVCT-GL-04) (CT-AppAuth) (Revision 2) (Effective August 30, 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Guidelines for Conducting Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Inspections in Zimbabwe (MCAZ-PVCT-GL-01) (GCP-Inspections) (Revision 1) (Effective May 8, 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Guidelines for Good Clinical Trial Practice in Zimbabwe (MCAZ/PVCT/GL-05) (ZWE-GCP) (Revision 3) (Effective August 30, 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Guidelines for Registration of Foreign Students to Conduct Research in Zimbabwe (G-RegForeignStud) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Guidelines for Section 75 Applications to Import Unregistered Medicines (Sec75-Imports) (Effective January 12, 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Pharmacy Guidelines for Investigational Medical Products (Pharm-IMPs) (Version 2) (Effective November 29, 2023)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Procedures for Assessment of a Clinical Trial Release or General Release of a Human Vaccine (NBA-Proc) (Date Unavailable)
National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Procedures for Foreign Researchers Registration (ProcForeignReg) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Registration Fees for Foreign Researchers (RegFeesForeign) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Reliance Guidelines for Regulation of Medicines (G-Reliance) (Effective March 24, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Circular) Circular No. 24 of 2025 – Fee Schedule (CT-Fees) (Effective September 1, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Circular) Circular No. 4 of 2023 – Change of Value Added Tax (VAT) Tax Rate from 14.5% to 15% (VATTax) (January 30, 2023)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Notice) Foreign Researchers Notice: Translation of Research Materials (Trslt-Ntc) (Effective September 17, 2024)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Policy) MCAZ Reliance Policy (ReliancePlcy) (Revision 2) (Effective April 25, 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Policy) Zimbabwe National Pharmacovigilance Policy Handbook (PharmVigHdbk) (2nd Edition) (December 2016)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
Additional Resources
(Document) Clinical Trial Process Flowchart (ZWE-65) (Date Unavailable)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Document) Electronic Online Clinical Trial Application (e-CTR) Registry System for Use by Applicants and Researchers - External User Manual (ZWE-85) (June 2020)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Document) Electronic Pharmacovigilance Reporting System External User Manual (Revision 1) (ZWE-87) (October 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Document) Inspection Checklist (ZWE-86) (Version 2) (March 3, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Document) Institutions for Translating Documents in Indigenous Languages of Zimbabwe (ZWE-5) (Date Unavailable)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (ZWE-91) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) SOP for Managing and Documenting Regulatory Communication with Regulatory Bodies (ZWE-74) (Version No. 12.0) (March 13, 2025)
University of Zimbabwe
(International Guidance) AVAREF Strategy and Guidance for Emergency Preparedness (ZWE-75) (May 18, 2020)
African Vaccine Regulatory Forum, World Health Organization
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (ZWE-70) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZWE-73) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) International Ethical Guidelines for Health-related Research Involving Humans (ZWE-79) (2016)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS)
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with University of Zimbabwe (September 2025) (ZWE-83)
(Webpage) Application for Renewal of Registration Certificate (ZWE-17) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Biomedical Research and Training Institute – Institutional Review Board (ZWE-25) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Biomedical Research and Training Institute
(Webpage) Clinical Trial’s Oversight (CT) (ZWE-14) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-1) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Country Profile: Zimbabwe (ZWE-92) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) Criteria for Institution of Affiliation (ZWE-12) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Destruction for Leftover Bio specimens Exported out Of Zimbabwe (ZWE-20) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Expedited Review for Foreign Researchers’ Applications (ZWE-10) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) ICH Guidelines (ZWE-80) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) MCAZ Online Services Login (ZWE-82) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe – Contact Us (ZWE-78) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe – Frequently Asked Questions (ZWE-11) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe – Overview (ZWE-7) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe – Vision/Mission (ZWE-8) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe - Import & Export (ZWE-81) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe - Licensing and Enforcement - Overview (ZWE-68) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe - Licensing (ZWE-2) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe - Who We Are (ZWE-3) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe – Clinical Trials (ZWE-4) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe – Contact Us (ZWE-66) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe – FAQs (ZWE-6) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) National Biotechnology Authority - About Us (ZWE-67) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) National Biotechnology Authority – Contact (ZWE-16) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) National Health Research Development Committee (ZWE-9) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Online Services (ZWE-15) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Overview of RCZ (ZWE-13) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-27) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Pan African Clinical Trials Registry
(Webpage) SAE, ADR and AEFI Electronic Reporting (ZWE-76) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
Forms
(Form) Adverse Event Summary Table (MRCZ 108) (ZWE-48) (Date Unavailable)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Amendment/Modification Form (MRCZ 103) (ZWE-43) (Version 1.3) (February 19, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application for a Clinical Trial Protocol Amendment (PVF 82) (ZWE-84) (Revision 1) (January 2023)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application for Additional Investigator(s), Change of Investigator(s), or Additional Clinical Trial Sites (PVF 83) (ZWE-32) (Revision 1) (January 2023)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application for Authorization to Conduct a Clinical Trial (M.C. 10) (ZWE-28) (Date Unavailable)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application for Continuing Review of Research Activity (MRCZ 102) (ZWE-42) (Version 1.4) (May 27, 2024)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application for Issue of a License for Premises (D.C.1) (ZWE-29) (Date Unavailable)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application for Renewal of Registration Certificate: Foreign Researchers (RA2) (ZWE-60) (Version 3.0) (July 2018)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application to Conduct Research (MRCZ 101) (ZWE-41) (Version 1.8) (May 2024)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Checklist: Application Package for Registration of Foreign Researcher and/or Shipment of Biospecimens Outside Zimbabwe Submitted to MRCZ for Forwarding to RCZ (ZWE-89) (Version 6.2) (March 25, 2022)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Clinical Trial Annual Progress Reporting Form for Investigators (PVF 76) (ZWE-77) (Revision 2) (May 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Consent of Person Who Will Participate in a Clinical Trial (M.C. 17) (ZWE-30) (Date Unavailable)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Declaration by Co- and Sub-Investigators for GCP Compliance (PVF 81) (ZWE-33) (Revision 1) (September 2022)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Declaration by Principal Investigator for GCP Compliance (PVF 80) (ZWE-34) (Revision 1) (September 2022)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Destruction Form (MRCZ 113) (ZWE-52) (Version 1.2) (February 19, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) General Instructions for Researchers Preparing Informed Consent Forms for Adult Research Participants (MRCZ 109) (ZWE-49) (Version 1.5) (February 4, 2022)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) General Instructions for Researchers Writing Informed Consent Forms for Parental Consent (MRCZ 110) (ZWE-50) (Version 2.1) (April 17, 2022)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Indemnity Form for Conducting Clinical Trials (M.C. 20) (ZWE-40) (Date Unavailable)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Investigator-Initiated Withdrawal of MRCZ Application (MRCZ 120) (ZWE-55) (Version 1.2) (November 22, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Joint Declaration by Sponsor and Principal Investigator Concerning Sufficient Funds to Complete Study (PVF 79) (ZWE-35) (Revision 1) (September 2022)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Long-term Specimen Storage and Future Use Informed Consent Form (ZWE-57) (2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Materials Transfer Agreement Form for Shipment of Materials from Zimbabwe (ZWE-62) (Version 3.0) (March 2015)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Meeting Request Form (PVF 27) (ZWE-37) (Revision 5) (June 2023)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) MRCZ Death Report Form (MRCZ 104b) (ZWE-46) (Version 1.1) (Revised May 30, 2010)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Protocol Deviation Reporting Form (MRCZ 114) (ZWE-53) (Version 2) (March 3, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Recommended Format for CVs of Individuals Participating in Clinical Trials (PVF 78) (ZWE-36) (Revision 1) (January 2023)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Registration Form to Conduct Research (RA1) (ZWE-59) (Version 4.0) (July 2018)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Request for Extension of Study Duration (MRCZ 112) (ZWE-51) (Version 2.0) (March 3, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Response to MRCZ Comments Template (MRCZ 201) (ZWE-44) (Version 2) (May 10, 2017)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Serious Adverse Event Reporting Form (ZWE-39) (Version 3.0) (September 2021)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe and Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Specimens Transfer Agreement Form for Shipment of Bio-Specimens from Zimbabwe (ZWE-63) (Version 4.0) (July 2016)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Spontaneous Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) Report Form (PVF 01) (ZWE-38) (Revision 9) (September 2022)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Study Re-opening Request Form (MRCZ 105) (ZWE-56) (Version 1) (March 1, 2017)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Submission Declaration Form – Declaration by Applicant (PVF 55) (ZWE-90) (Revision 3) (July 2022)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Termination of IRB Approval Form (MRCZ 105) (ZWE-47) (Version 1.2) (February 19, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
Sign up to be a country expert
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 


Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Australia
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
This message was reviewed on December 29, 2025
Updated National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human Research

The National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) released the updated National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human Research 2025, which will take effect in early 2026 (date to be confirmed). The 2025 National Statement includes updates related to research involving participants who may experience increased risk; additional guidance on research involving specific populations; and new information on research conducted during natural disasters, public health emergencies, or other crises. For details regarding the updates made in the 2025 version, see the FAQs page. For general information about the National Statement, see this webpage.

Therapeutic Goods Administration Clinical Trials Webpages Update

Per a notice on the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA)’s Clinical Trials page, the TGA is currently updating and restructuring its clinical trial webpages so some of the TGA sources and links may not align with the information listed in the Australia profile.

Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Therapeutic Goods Administration

As per the TGAct, the TGR, and the G-CTHandbook, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial approvals, oversight, and inspections in Australia at the national level. The TGA allows for the supply of unapproved therapeutic goods to be used in clinical trials for experimental purposes in humans in accordance with the provisions in the TGAct and the TGR. There are two (2) regulatory schemes for supplying unapproved therapeutic goods in clinical investigations, which are more fully examined in the Scope of Assessment section.

As per AUS-28, the TGA is part of the Health Products Regulation Group (HPRG) within the Australian Department of Health, Disability and Ageing. The TGA’s Pharmacovigilance Branch is responsible for evaluating and authorizing certain clinical trials for all types of therapeutic products. According to the G-TrialsSOP the TGA also regulates the supply, import, export, manufacturing, and advertising of therapeutic goods. Per AUS-32, therapeutic goods include prescription medicines, non-prescription medicines, vaccines, sunscreens, vitamins, medical devices, blood and blood products, and software and artificial intelligence-based medical devices. See AUS-31 for more information on the different types of therapeutic goods that the TGA regulates.

AUS-32 indicates that the TGA maintains the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG) (AUS-22), a public database of therapeutic goods that can be legally supplied in Australia. According to the TGAct, the TGA grants exemptions from inclusion in the ARTG for unapproved therapeutic goods to be supplied in clinical trials.

Other Considerations

According to AUS-74, the TGA closely aligns its regulatory approaches to therapeutic products with those of comparable international regulatory counterparts, including the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH), the European Medicines Agency (EMA), and the United States Food & Drug Administration (FDA), wherever possible. For more information on the international scientific guidelines adopted in Australia, see AUS-74.

Contact Information

Per AUS-23, the contact information for the TGA is as follows:

Postal Address:
P.O. Box 100
Woden ACT 2606
Australia

For general questions:

Phone: 1 800 020 653 (free call within Australia) or +61 2 6289 4124 (international calls)
Fax: 02 6203 1605
E-mail: use online form (see AUS-11)

For clinical trial questions:
E-mail: clinical.trials@health.gov.au

AUS-47 notes that the TGA info team (see AUS-23) should be contacted if the question is not specifically about clinical trials conducted within the Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) or the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) schemes. Users who are deaf or have a hearing or speech impairment can call through the National Relay Service. See AUS-47 for more information.

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the G-CTHandbook, the G-TrialsSOP, and AUS-86, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) allows for the supply of unapproved therapeutic goods to be used in clinical trials under two (2) regulatory schemes—the Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) scheme and the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) scheme. The G-CTHandbook specifies that the scope of the TGA’s assessment includes all clinical trials (Phases I-IV).

Under either regulatory scheme, per the TGR, the G-CTHandbook, the G-TrialsSOP, and AUS-86, an ethics committee (EC) (Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC) in Australia) must approve the research protocol. The G-NatlStmt further specifies that any research that involves greater than low risk must be reviewed by an EC.

According to AUS-40, all public and private health organizations must also undertake a site-specific assessment (SSA) of each research project. This allows the institution to consider whether the project is suitable for the site and whether it has the capacity to conduct the research at that site. Per the G-TrialsSOP, the SSA and ethics review may occur in parallel. However, EC approval must be obtained and submitted to the research governance officer (RGO) of each participating institution before institutional authorization is granted.

For summaries of the clinical trials regulatory environment, legislation, and guidance, see AUS-40. See AUS-91 for TGA summaries of recent clinical trial reforms.

Clinical Trial Review Process

Per the G-CTHandbook, the sponsor is responsible for the overall decision as to whether the CTN or CTA scheme should be used. Consulting the EC responsible for protocol approval may assist the sponsor in making the decision. The main difference between the CTN and CTA schemes is the TGA’s level of involvement in reviewing data about the therapeutic goods before the clinical trial commences.

However, as noted in AUS-88, the CTA scheme is mandatory for certain Class 4 biologicals. See AUS-86 for more general information on choosing a clinical trial scheme.

CTN Scheme

As per the G-CTHandbook, the G-TrialsSOP, and AUS-87, under the CTN scheme, the sponsor must notify the TGA of its intention to sponsor a clinical trial involving an unapproved therapeutic good. The TGA does not assess any data relating to the proposed trial at the time of notification. AUS-87 further notes that some ECs and institutions may need the TGA’s acknowledgement before beginning their own approval processes. In these cases, the TGA will accept a CTN submission while the sponsor gets the required approvals from the EC and institution. However, it is the sponsor’s responsibility to ensure that all relevant approvals and authorizations are in place before commencement of the trial.

The G-CTHandbook and AUS-87 indicate that a clinical trial is deemed to be notified as soon as the online CTN form (via the TGA Business Services (TBS) webpage (AUS-36)) has been submitted and the relevant fee has been paid. If there are any changes/variations to the trial details notified to the TGA, the sponsor must update the relevant fields on the online CTN form. AUS-87 notes that some changes/variations (such as the addition of a new site to a trial, a change to the notified therapeutic good that creates a separate and distinct good, or the addition of a new therapeutic good to a previously notified trial) will incur a fee.

The G-CTHandbook further states that the TGA may request additional information if the trial raises any concern, or ask specific questions to address any deficiencies. Specifically, the TGA can request certain information or documents from the sponsor relating to the supply and handling of the goods, as well as the monitoring and results of the supply of the goods. If the TGA directs a trial notified under the CTN scheme not to be conducted or becomes aware that conducting or continuing the trial would be contrary to the public interest, then the goods used in the trial would no longer be exempt from inclusion in the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG) (AUS-22) and cannot be lawfully supplied. This may occur if the TGA becomes aware that allowing the trial to proceed or continue carries an unacceptable risk of death, serious illness, or serious injury.

CTA Scheme

AUS-88 indicates that the CTA scheme involves an application to the TGA for approval to supply an unapproved therapeutic good(s) in a clinical trial, where the TGA will evaluate scientific data about the therapeutic good(s) (quality, preclinical, and early clinical safety data) prior to the start of a trial. The sponsor can, either following TGA approval or in parallel with the TGA’s evaluation, contact their chosen EC to initiate the EC’s review of the scientific and ethical details of the trial proposal. However, trials can only commence once both TGA and EC approvals have been received.

According to AUS-88, the TGA is in the process of reviewing the CTA scheme. Stakeholders seeking more information on the CTA process are encouraged to contact the TGA at clinical.trials@health.gov.au. Sponsors planning to submit a CTA application are also encouraged to request a pre-submission meeting with the TGA. See the Submission Process section for more information on pre-submission meetings.

AUS-88 states that after the sponsor submits the CTA application form and supporting data, the TGA generally conducts a preliminary assessment to ensure that the data is sufficient to begin evaluation. If there is critical data missing, the TGA will request further information. Once it is satisfied that there is sufficient data/information to commence evaluation, the TGA will send an invoice. The TGA’s evaluation begins after the sponsor pays the fee. During its review, the TGA generally evaluates the quality of the therapeutic good, the safety of the therapeutic good, compliance with applicable Therapeutic Goods Orders (TGOs) (see AUS-93), compliance with international guidelines, and labelling (including traceability). The evaluation process usually consists of two (2) rounds of evaluation and one (1) round of request for information from the sponsor. Additional rounds may be required if there is outstanding information required to support the evaluation process or decision.

As delineated in AUS-88, evaluation reports with recommendations are then submitted to the decision maker, a TGA senior medical officer, for consideration. The decision maker considers the overall risk-benefit profile of the trial, which may include TGA evaluation reports; the trial’s usage guidelines (such as the trial protocol, investigator’s brochure, literature references, and pharmacy guidelines); and plans for shipment and storage at trial sites. The decision maker may seek expert advice from TGA statutory advisory committees. The TGA will inform the sponsor in a letter of the decision whether to approve the trial or not.

AUS-88 further states that if a sponsor wishes to change the therapeutic good(s) or any aspect of the clinical trial that was evaluated in the original CTA submission, a variation requiring additional evaluation by the TGA may be required. These changes are assessed to ensure that the quality and safety of the good(s), or the overall risk-benefit profile of the trial, will not be inadvertently altered by the variation. Examples may include significant changes to the manufacturing process, intended patient group, route of administration, and/or container. CTA variations incur a fee. Any changes that were not evaluated in the original submission or are predicted to have no effect on the therapeutic good or safety of the trial will not be assessed by the TGA. However, all changes should be communicated to and approved by the EC before commencement. Sponsors are encouraged to contact the TGA at clinical.trials@health.gov.au for specific advice on what constitutes a variation to a previously approved CTA application.

As indicated in the G-CTHandbook, the TGA can revoke an approval of a clinical trial under the CTA scheme where the conditions of approval are not met.

Inspection

According to the G-GCP-Inspect, clinical trials of medicines and biologicals regulated under the CTN or CTA schemes are subject to the TGA’s Good Clinical Practice (GCP) inspection program. The TGA can conduct a GCP inspection, which typically occurs over one (1) to three (3) consecutive days, at any stage of the clinical trial lifecycle from the early phase of participant recruitment to completed trials. Additionally, the TGA can request certain information or documents about therapeutic goods exempt under the CTN scheme or approved under the CTA scheme. This can include the investigator’s brochure and protocol, further information about safety reports, clarification about the safety profile of a specific therapeutic good, and/or details of problems or complaints. The TGA will normally give advance notice of its intention to conduct a GCP inspection but has the right to perform an inspection at any time. In exceptional circumstances, the TGA can perform an inspection without notice.

See the G-GCP-Inspect for more details on how the TGA prioritizes and schedules GCP inspections, the kinds of inspections the TGA might conduct, the inspection process, and how the TGA reports and follows up on inspections. See AUS-90 for more information on the TGA’s GCP inspection program.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Therapeutic Goods Administration

As per the TGR, the sponsor is responsible for paying a fee to the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) to submit an application under the Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) or Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) scheme for evaluation. Per the G-FeesCharges, the fees are as follows:

$443 Australian dollars for unapproved medicines CTN, and for each notification of one (1) or more additional trial sites
$2,111 Australia dollars for unapproved medicines CTA (30-day evaluation)
$580 Australian dollars for unapproved medicines CTA – variation (30-day evaluation)
$26,240 Australian dollars for unapproved medicines CTA (50-day evaluation)
$7,162 Australian dollars for unapproved medicines CTA – variation (50-day evaluation)
$443 Australian dollars for unapproved biologicals CTN, and for each notification of one (1) or more additional trial sites
$31,955 Australian dollars for unapproved biologicals CTA
$8,718 Australian dollars for unapproved biologicals CTA – variation
For additional fee information, refer to Schedules 9 and 9A of the TGR and the G-FeesCharges.

Payment Instructions

AUS-66 indicates that regulatory fees and charges may be paid online or by bank transfer (electronic funds transfer (EFT)). Online payment by credit card is the preferred payment option, and all payments must be in Australian dollars.

As stated in AUS-25, online payment is made via the TGA Online Payment Portal (AUS-16). Once the payment has been finalized, the Portal will confirm that the payment has been successful. The user may request an email confirmation. Certain payments, including a CTN fee and a variation to a medicine (e.g., a therapeutic good), may be made online without an invoice. See AUS-25 for more information on TGA fees and payments. Also see AUS-49 for additional guidance and system screenshots related to paying CTN fees.

AUS-66 further indicates that to ensure all payments made by EFT are correctly allocated, the organization’s Identification Number (e.g., TGA00xxxxx) should be included in the payment ‘Reference’ field. Bank transfer fees are the payer’s responsibility. Additionally, bank transfers must be accompanied by a remittance advice, which must be issued within 24 hours for all bank transfers. Remittance advices must be emailed to TGARemittanceAdvices@health.gov.au and contain the organization’s Identification Number in the subject field. The TGA’s bank account details are as follows:

Bank: Commonwealth Bank of Australia
BSB: 062-909
Account Number: 10215498

Per AUS-66, payments from overseas can only be accepted in Australian denominations. Payers must ensure that their payment covers any international banking fees. The TGA’s international banking details are as follows:

IBAN: 06290910215498
Swift Code: CTBAAU2S

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Overview

As indicated in the TGAct, the TGR, the G-CTHandbook, the G-NatlStmt, and AUS-86, Australia has a decentralized process for the ethics review and approval of clinical trial research. According to the TGR, the G-CTHandbook, the G-TrialsSOP, and AUS-86, Australia requires human research protocols to be reviewed by an institutional-level ethics committee (EC). The G-NatlStmt further specifies that any research that involves greater than low risk must be reviewed by an EC. (Note: Institutional ECs are referred to as Human Research Ethics Committees (HRECs) in Australia.)

The G-NatlStmt indicates that one (1) or more institutions can individually or jointly establish an EC or any other ethics review body. Institutions that establish an EC are responsible for adequately resourcing and maintaining it, including providing sufficient administrative support. Per the TGAct and AUS-20, ECs are required to be constituted and operate in accordance with the guidelines issued by the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), and to have notified the NHMRC of their existence. According to the TGR, the G-NatlStmt, the G-TrialsSOP, and AUS-20, institutional ECs ensure that clinical trial research complies with the NHMRC’s ethical standards published in the G-NatlStmt. See the Oversight of Ethics Committees section for more information on notification.

For summaries of the clinical trials regulatory environment, legislation, and guidance, see AUS-40.

Ethics Committee Composition

As stated in the G-NatlStmt, an EC must be composed of at least eight (8) members in the following categories:

A chairperson with suitable experience
Two (2) people who bring a broader community or consumer perspective and have no paid affiliation with the institution
One (1) person with knowledge of and current experience in the professional care, counseling, and/or treatment of people
One (1) person who performs a pastoral care role in the community
One (1) qualified lawyer, who may or may not be currently practicing and, where possible, is not engaged to advise the institution on research-related or any other matters
Two (2) people with current research experience relevant to the research proposals to be considered at the meetings they attend
The G-NatlStmt further states that wherever possible, one (1) or more of the members listed above should be experienced in reflecting on and analyzing ethical decision-making. As far as is practicable, institutions should ensure that their EC’s membership at each meeting has diversity, including gender diversity, and at least one third of those participating in each meeting are from outside of the institution. ECs that review research about Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people or communities should appoint one (1) or more members who have knowledge of research with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples or are familiar with relevant cultural knowledge, if such a person has not already been appointed.

Per the G-NatlStmt, ECs may also include other members with the above areas of expertise or with additional areas of expertise. Institutions are encouraged to establish a pool of appointed EC members to draw on as needed to help meet minimum membership requirements and/or provide additional experience or expertise. The institution should ensure that its EC has access to the expertise necessary to properly review research, which may necessitate going outside of the EC’s membership.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

As delineated in the G-NatlStmt, institutional ECs must ensure that it documents, implements, and publicizes standard operating procedures (SOPs) that promote good ethics review, including:

Meeting frequency, attendance, and conduct
Minutes and agenda preparation
Timely distribution of materials to members before meetings
Timely consideration of applications
Methods of deliberation and decision-making
Processes, if any, for reviewing applications from unaffiliated or international researchers
Disclosure of interests and management of conflicts of interest
Appropriate confidentiality of the content of applications and the deliberations of review bodies
Prompt notification of decisions to researchers
Communicating with researchers, including face to face, by telephone and in writing, (including available forms of electronic communication)
Record keeping
Monitoring of approved research
Reporting and handling of adverse events
Receiving and handling of complaints
Advising the institution(s) of decisions to suspend or withdraw ethics approval of research projects
Attendance of people other than members at meetings
Pursuant to the G-NatlStmt, EC members should be familiar with the G-NatlStmt and other relevant guidelines; prepare for and attend EC meetings or, if unavailable, provide opinions before the meetings; and attend research ethics training programs or continuing education at least every three (3) years. Members should be appointed to an EC using open and transparent processes, and institutions should consider reviewing appointments to the EC at least every three (3) years.

The G-NatlStmt states that as far as possible, each EC meeting should be arranged to enable attendance of all members of the minimum membership categories listed above and other relevant appointed members, either in person or via available technology. Meeting papers should be provided enough in advance to enable members to be fully informed. An EC’s decision about whether a research proposal meets the requirements of the G-NatlStmt must be informed by an exchange of opinions from all members of the EC participating in the meeting. The exchange should, ideally, take place at a meeting with all those members present. Where there is less than full attendance of the minimum membership categories at a meeting, the chairperson must be satisfied, before a decision is reached, that the views of those absent who belong to the minimum membership have been received and considered. The EC should attempt to reach decisions by general agreement or consensus. Voting is neither required nor prohibited. Some decisions may not be unanimous, and a dissent should be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. Where requested by a dissenting member, the reasons for the dissent should also be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.

According to the G-NatlStmt, ECs may invite researchers, and researchers may request, to be present for discussion of their proposed research. In addition, ECs may seek advice from external experts to help in considering a research proposal. Communication between the sponsor and the EC is not prohibited but should be restricted so that it does not inappropriately influence the review of any relevant research proposals.

As delineated in the G-NatlStmt, ECs must maintain a complete record of all research proposals received and reviewed. Approved project documentation and any relevant correspondence must also be retained. Records must be maintained in accordance with the requirements of relevant Commonwealth and state or territory legislation and guidelines. See G-NatlStmt for detailed records requirements.

For more details on the governance and responsibilities of Australian institutional ECs, see the G-NatlStmt.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Overview

According to the G-NatlStmt, the institutional ethics committee (EC) (Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC) in Australia) is responsible for protecting the interests of research participants and for promoting good research by ensuring adherence to the values of research merit and integrity, beneficence, justice, and respect for persons throughout the conduct of the research project. The EC must review the recruitment and consent processes, weigh the benefits and risks of the research, and consider the impact of the research on certain groups of participants deemed to merit special consideration. Additionally, ECs may conduct both scientific and ethics review or may delegate scientific review to a sub-committee.

Pursuant to the G-NatlStmt, the establishment and maintenance of ethics review processes and processes for assessing the risk level of the research are part of an institution’s overall governance responsibility. In addition to ethics approval, research must also be authorized by each institution with responsibility for oversight of the research before it can proceed. See the Oversight of Ethics Committees, Submission Process, Submission Content, Timeline of Review, and Initiation, Agreements & Registration sections for more information on research governance requirements.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

According to the G-CTHandbook, the G-TrialsSOP, and AUS-86, ECs are responsible for reviewing and approving protocols involving unapproved therapeutic goods under one (1) of two (2) regulatory schemes—the Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) scheme or the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) scheme—prior to the sponsor initiating a trial. According to AUS-40, all public and private health organizations must also undertake a site-specific assessment (SSA) of each research project. This allows the institution to consider whether the project is suitable for the site, and whether it has the capacity to conduct the research at that site. Per the G-TrialsSOP, the SSA and ethics review may occur in parallel. However, EC approval must be obtained and submitted to the research governance officer (RGO) of each participating institution before institutional authorization is granted.

The G-CTHandbook states that a CTN scheme is a notification scheme under which the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) does not review or evaluate any data relating to the clinical trial. The EC is responsible for assessing the scientific validity of the trial design, the balance of risk versus harm of the therapeutic good(s), and the overall ethical acceptability of the trial. AUS-87 notes that some ECs and institutions may need the TGA’s acknowledgement before beginning their own approval processes. In these cases, the TGA will accept a CTN submission while the sponsor gets the required approvals from the EC and institution. However, it is the sponsor’s responsibility to ensure that all relevant approvals and authorizations are in place before commencement of the trial.

Under the CTA scheme, as delineated in the G-CTHandbook, the TGA reviews relevant, but limited, scientific data, while the EC is responsible for considering the scientific and ethical issues of the proposed trial protocol. AUS-88 indicates that the sponsor can, either following TGA approval or in parallel with the TGA’s evaluation, contact their chosen EC to initiate ethics review of the CTA scheme trial proposal. However, trials can only commence once both TGA and EC approvals have been received.

Per the G-CTHandbook, the sponsor determines whether to conduct a clinical trial under the CTN or CTA scheme. Consulting the EC responsible for protocol approval may assist the sponsor in making the decision. One of the determining factors for an EC is whether the committee has access to appropriate scientific and technical expertise in order to assess the safety of the product. If an EC feels that it requires additional expertise to review a CTN, it may seek advice from external authorities or it may seek to collaborate with another EC that has the required expertise. An EC may also determine that it does not have access to the appropriate scientific and technical expertise to review the proposed trial under the CTN scheme and recommend review under the CTA scheme.

AUS-14 states that prior to approving a clinical trial, the EC must be satisfied that the trial protocol complies with the following requirements:

G-NatlStmt
Declaration of Helsinki (AUS-52)
AU-ICH-GCP
TGA requirements, including the G-CTHandbook and the G-SafetyDataMgt
Any relevant Australian Government and/or state/territory laws
The G-CTHandbook and the TGR state that during its review, the EC also needs to be aware of relevant state and territory laws pertaining to the supply of therapeutic goods or other clinical trial-related matters. The G-CTHandbook further indicates that ECs have a high level of independence and are responsible for establishing their own processes for reviewing research proposals. According to the G-CTHandbook and the AU-ICH-GCP, if requirements specified in the G-NatlStmt appear to differ from those specified in the AU-ICH-GCP, the TGA recommends compliance with the G-NatlStmt.

As stated in AUS-20, ECs also consider the protection of privacy for humans participating in research and their data. ECs do this by considering whether the research proposal conforms to relevant legislation, principles, and guidelines, including federal and/or state/territory legislation as well as the G-PrivacyAct95 and G-PrivacyAct95A guidelines. See the Personal Data Protection section for more information.

Per the G-NatlStmt, an EC may approve, request modification of, reject, or withdraw approval of a research proposal. The EC must clearly communicate its decision to the researcher(s):

Where a proposal is approved or rejected, or where approval is withdrawn, communication must be in writing (which may include electronic formats) and should include an explicit statement that the proposal meets or did not meet the requirements of the G-NatlStmt. If rejecting or withdrawing approval of a research proposal, the EC should provide the rationale for its decision, including citing the provisions of the G-NatlStmt or relevant institutional policy that underpins its decision, if relevant.
Where modifications are requested, communication may be written or, where appropriate, informal; however, a record should be kept of any informal communication, and guidance should be clearly communicated regarding to whom the researcher’s response should be directed.
According to the G-NatlStmt, varying processes may be used for the review and approval of project extensions, amendments to an approved project, progress reports, and renewal of project approval. Appropriate processes depend on the nature of the original project and any proposed changes, but any process authorized by an institution for these purposes must prioritize the safety and well-being of participants, researchers, and/or the community.

Pursuant to the G-CTHandbook and the TGR, when the EC approves a trial protocol, it takes responsibility for monitoring the progress and conduct of the trial. However, the G-NatlStmt indicates that each institution has ultimate responsibility for ensuring, via its research governance arrangements, that all its authorized research is monitored. Monitoring arrangements should be commensurate with the risk, size, and complexity of the research. Monitoring responsibilities that are performed by the institution’s EC should be based on the EC’s review of the project. However, where research that will take place at multiple sites has been reviewed by only one (1) EC, the ECs of the other institutions participating in the project do not have knowledge of the project. In such cases, only the reviewing EC can take on those elements of monitoring a research project that are commonly performed by ECs.

Per the G-NatlStmt, if the EC or institution has reason to believe that continuance of a research project would compromise participants' welfare, or if the conditions of ethics approval for the project are not being adhered to, it should immediately seek to establish whether ethical approval for the project should be suspended or withdrawn. If an institution or EC considers that suspension of research is necessary, the instruction to stop should come from the management of the institution. If ethics approval for a research project is suspended, the researcher, the institution(s), and, where possible, the participants should be informed of the suspension.

As indicated in the G-NatlStmt, ECs may require researchers to amend research procedures to protect participants. If an EC determines that such changes cannot achieve that end, the EC may decline to grant an extension to project approval or decide to withdraw approval for the research. Where ethics approval for a research project is withdrawn:

The researcher, the institution(s), and, where possible, the participants should be informed of the withdrawal
Continuation of the research project is subject to re-application and re-approval by the EC
See the G-NatlStmt for more details on institutional and EC responsibilities regarding research monitoring.

External Ethics Approval and the National Mutual Acceptance Scheme

The G-NatlStmt encourages the minimization of unnecessary duplication of ethics review, including for research conducted in multiple Australian jurisdictions or across international boundaries. Institutions may accept an ethics review conducted by an entity external to the institution (including overseas review bodies) and should determine their criteria for this acceptance.

Per the G-NatlStmt, researchers who wish to submit evidence of ethics approval by an external EC in support of single ethics review should be aware of existing national or international programs, protocols, policies, standards, and guidance that may be relevant to the institutional decision to accept the review. To facilitate the efficient ethics review of research, researchers must inform any EC of:

All sites at which the research will be conducted
Any information on local site circumstances that is relevant to the ethics review
Any other body that will be considering ethical issues related to the research
Any previous decisions to approve, re-consider, or deny approval of the research by another review body in Australia or elsewhere
See the G-NatlStmt for more information on external ethics approval.

As described in AUS-21 and AUS-41, the National Mutual Acceptance (NMA) scheme further supports the acceptance of a single scientific and ethical review of multicenter research conducted in publicly funded health services. All state and territory-certified public health organizations in Australia are part of the NMA scheme.

Per AUS-68, in order for ethics reviews of human research to be accepted under NMA, the EC conducting the review must be certified under the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) National Certification Scheme of Institutional Processes Related to the Ethical Review of Multi-centre Research (National Certification Scheme), and also be a “Certified Reviewing HREC” under the NMA scheme.

For more information on submissions to ECs under the NMA scheme and the National Certification Scheme, see the Submission Process and Oversight of Ethics Committees sections.

Exemption from Ethics Review

As stated in the G-NatlStmt, some research may be eligible for exemption from ethics review. Where appropriate, exemption is granted, or not, by the institution responsible for the research. Where there is no institution providing oversight of the research, researchers should request a grant of exemption from an EC. Research that may be eligible for exemption from ethics review includes research that carries a lower risk to participants or the community, and satisfies one (1) or more of the following conditions:

The research involves the use of collections of information or data from which all personal identifiers have been removed prior to being received by the researchers, and where researchers explicitly agree: (i) not to attempt to re-identify those with whom the information or data is associated; (ii) to take all reasonable steps to prevent re-identification of the information or data for unauthorized purposes or access to the information or data by those who are not authorized; and (iii) that any sharing of any research data during or after the project will not create any additional risks of re-identification of the information or data
The research is restricted to surveys and observation of public behavior using information that was or will be collected and recorded without personal identifiers and is highly unlikely to cause distress to anyone associated with the information or the outcomes of the research
Is conducted as part of an educational training program in which the research activity is for training purposes only and where any outcomes or documentation are for program use only
The research uses only information that is publicly available through a mechanism set out by legislation or regulation and that is protected by law, such as mandatory reporting information, information obtained from registries of births and deaths, coroner’s investigations, or reports of the Australian Bureau of Statistics
The G-NatlStmt indicates that institutions or other granting bodies must keep a record of any decision to grant exemption from ethics review. See the G-NatlStmt for more information on ethics review exemption.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
The G-NatlStmt indicates that when establishing an ethics committee (EC) (Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC) in Australia), an institution must set out and publicize its terms of reference, including its schedule of fees charged, if any, for ethics review. The institution is responsible for ensuring that its EC operates in accordance with the G-NatlStmt, which includes being satisfied that any fees charged for EC review do not discourage research that the institution has an obligation to support.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Overview

As per the TGAct, the G-TrialsSOP, and the G-CTHandbook, the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) is responsible for receiving applications from ethics committees (ECs) (Human Research Ethics Committees (HRECs) in Australia) to be registered. The NHMRC was established by the NHMRCAct. Per the NHMRCAct, the NHMRC’s activities are designed to raise the standard of individual and public health throughout Australia; to foster the development of consistent health standards between the various states and territories; to foster medical and public health research and training throughout Australia; and to foster consideration of ethical issues relating to health.

Research Governance

Pursuant to the G-NatlStmt, institutions may fulfill their research governance responsibilities by establishing and overseeing different levels of ethics review. One (1) or more institutions can individually or jointly establish an EC or any other ethics review body. Institutions that establish an EC are responsible for adequately resourcing and maintaining it, including providing sufficient administrative support.

According to the G-NatlStmt, institutions should ensure that all ethics review processes and the criteria that are used for determining the appropriate process are clear, transparent, and published to enable researchers to submit their research proposals efficiently.

The G-NatlStmt further states that institutions should clearly publicize their policy for access to their EC or other ethics review processes by researchers who are not affiliated with the institution. Additionally, institutions should regularly assess all their ethics review processes, including the criteria for allocating research to different levels of review, to ensure that those processes continue to enable the institution to meet its responsibilities under the G-NatlStmt. Where possible this assessment should be informed by the documented experience of research participants and/or by involving participants or the wider community in the assessment.

Furthermore, as delineated in the G-NatlStmt, institutions should have in place an auditing process to confirm that research is being reviewed at the levels of review that their criteria require and research is being exempted from review only in accordance with the criteria set out in the G-NatlStmt. See the Scope of Review section for more information on exemption criteria.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

According to the G-NatlStmt, institutions that have responsibility for oversight of research and maintain ECs must register their ECs with the NHMRC. ECs that are not associated with institutions must register themselves with the NHMRC.

Per AUS-20, registration means that the EC has notified the NHMRC of its existence and declared that it meets the requirements of the G-NatlStmt. In order to review and monitor clinical trials of unregistered therapeutic goods, an EC must be notified to the NHMRC, and constituted and operating in accordance with the G-NatlStmt. Forms for registering an EC, notifying the NHMRC of changes to the EC, or terminating an EC’s registration are available at AUS-20.

As per the G-NatlStmt, an institution and its EC must report annually, or upon request, to the NHMRC. The NHMRC, through the Australian Health Ethics Committee (AHEC), will review the activities of ECs to ensure conformance with the G-NatlStmt. Reportable information may include:

Membership/membership changes
Number of meetings
Confirmation of participation in meetings by members in minimum membership categories
The number of research proposals presented, the number approved, the number requiring modification prior to approval, and the number rejected
Monitoring procedures that are in place and any problems encountered with project monitoring
Complaints procedures and number of complaints handled
Any other relevant policies, procedures, or processes as determined by the NHMRC
The G-NatlStmt further indicates that failure to comply with the requirements of the G-NatlStmt may result in the EC being removed from the list of ECs registered with NHMRC. See AUS-20 for more information and the list of registered ECs.

National Certification Scheme

According to AUS-21, the NHMRC developed the National Certification Scheme of Institutional Processes Related to the Ethical Review of Multi-centre Research (National Certification Scheme) to enable the single ethics and scientific review of human research occurring at multiple institutions in Australia. Under this scheme, certified institutions can have their ethics review accepted by other institutions participating in the research project. As part of the National Certification Scheme, certified institutions and their ECs are required to report to the NHMRC on their multicenter research activities.

As per AUS-21, the NHMRC assesses each institution’s interest in certification on a case-by-case basis. Certification respects institutional decisions about research governance matters, including whether research should be conducted at a given site. Before commencing steps to apply for certification, institutions should contact HREC.admin@nhmrc.gov.au.

For more information on the National Certification Scheme and the NHMRC’s continuous certification process, see AUS-21.

As stated in AUS-68, EC certification under the National Certification Scheme is required in order for ethics reviews of human research to be accepted under the National Mutual Acceptance (NMA) scheme. The NMA scheme facilitates single scientific and ethical review of clinical trials conducted in participating jurisdiction’s public health organizations. See the Scope of Review section for more information on NMA.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the G-CTHandbook, the G-TrialsSOP, and AUS-86, Australia requires the sponsor to obtain clinical trial authorization from the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) for the supply of unapproved therapeutic goods for clinical trials for experimental purposes in humans. The sponsor can apply under two (2) regulatory schemes—the Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) scheme and the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) scheme.

Under either regulatory scheme, per the TGR, the G-CTHandbook, the G-TrialsSOP, and AUS-86, an ethics committee (EC) (Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC) in Australia) must approve the research protocol. The G-NatlStmt further specifies that any research that involves greater than low risk must be reviewed by an EC.

AUS-87 notes that some ECs and institutions may need the TGA’s acknowledgement before beginning their own approval processes. In these cases, the TGA will accept a CTN submission while the sponsor gets the required approvals from the EC and institution. However, it is the sponsor’s responsibility to ensure that all relevant approvals and authorizations are in place before commencement of the trial. Additionally, AUS-88 indicates that the sponsor can, either following TGA approval or in parallel with the TGA’s evaluation, contact their chosen EC to initiate ethics review of the CTA scheme trial proposal. However, trials can only commence once both TGA and EC approvals have been received.

According to AUS-40, all public and private health organizations must also undertake a site-specific assessment (SSA) of each research project. This allows the institution to consider whether the project is suitable for the site, and whether it has the capacity to conduct the research at that site. Per the G-TrialsSOP, the SSA and ethics review may occur in parallel. However, EC approval must be obtained and submitted to the research governance officer (RGO) of each participating institution before institutional authorization is granted. While there is no submission language requirement stated in the requirements, the official language of Australia is English.

Regulatory Submission

Per AUS-92, sponsors may request pre-submission meetings with the TGA. A pre-submission meeting can help both the applicant and the TGA to obtain a common understanding of the therapeutic good and what supporting documentation is needed to evaluate the application, as well as any issues to resolve before submitting applications. A meeting can also help the applicant and the TGA plan for the submission and manage both timeframes and resources.

AUS-88 indicates that all sponsors considering a CTA application submission are encouraged to request a pre-submission meeting. In the meeting, the TGA can clarify any questions the applicant has about existing studies or the proposed data package for a CTA application and give specialized advice on the CTA application process (including the best ways to submit the application and dossier).

See AUS-92 for more information on pre-submission meetings and AUS-17 for the applicable forms.

CTN Scheme

According to AUS-87 and AUS-30, CTN forms are submitted online through the TGA Business Services (TBS) webpage (AUS-36). The sponsor must have or obtain a TGA Client Identification Number.

As per AUS-49, to submit the online CTN form successfully through AUS-36, the sponsor must accept a declaration to assume responsibility for the trial. After accepting the declaration, a webpage will advise the sponsor that the CTN submission has been successful.

AUS-49 indicates that the sponsor may delegate duties and correspondence with the TGA to an authorized agent, which is able to create and submit a CTN on behalf of a sponsor. If an agent has submitted a CTN on the sponsor’s behalf, the sponsor will not have access to view or vary the CTN. Access is only granted to the agent.

See AUS-30 and AUS-49 for additional information on using and submitting the online form.

CTA Scheme

According to AUS-88 and AUS-89, the sponsor must submit the application form (AUS-56) and supporting data to the TGA as part of a CTA application, followed by a trial commencement notification form (AUS-57). Per AUS-89, all CTA forms should be submitted to the TGA via email at clinical.trials@health.gov.au (PDFs or Word files). If sending the forms by email (the recommended method), the sponsor is not required to send physical copies to the mailing addresses detailed in each form. Electronic/digital signatures can be used.

AUS-89 indicates that the sponsor should submit the supporting data in an electronic dossier (searchable PDFs). This should be sent via email to clinical.trials@health.gov.au. The sponsor is encouraged to contact the TGA for advice if the file is too large. See AUS-94 for more information on electronic dossiers and submissions.

As stated in AUS-89, the sponsor must send the notification form (AUS-57) to the TGA within 28 days of commencing supply of the unapproved therapeutic goods at each site.

Ethics Review Submission

AUS-46 indicates that the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) developed the Human Research Ethics Application (HREA) form (AUS-9) as a concise application to facilitate timely and efficient ethics review for research involving humans. The HREA assists researchers in considering the ethical principles of the G-NatlStmt in relation to their research and is accepted by institutions that participate in the National Mutual Acceptance (NMA) scheme, which facilitates single ethics review by multiple public health organizations for most human research.

According to the G-CTHandbook, trial sponsors and researchers should use the HREA unless advised otherwise. AUS-19 contains resources for using the HREA.

Per AUS-46, research proposals should be submitted to ECs associated with public health institutions in New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Australian Capital Territory, and Victoria, as well as Mater Research, via the Research GEMS system (AUS-55), the Ethical Review Manager (ERM) website (AUS-8), and/or the Research Ethics and Governance Information System (REGIS) (AUS-10), depending on which jurisdictions are involved. For research in the Northern Territory, Tasmania, or Western Australia, the EC should be contacted for their local submission requirements.

The G-CTHandbook further states that ECs have a high level of independence and are responsible for establishing their own processes for receiving research proposals.

Research Governance

According to the G-NatlStmt, institutions should publish (such as on their website) clear policies and procedures for institutional authorization of research. As noted in the G-CTHandbook, individual jurisdictions have specific requirements as a part of their SSA and authorization processes. South Australia sites use the online SSA form found in the Research GEMS system (AUS-55), while the ERM website (AUS-8) is used for SSA form submission for Mater Research, Queensland, and Victoria. New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory use REGIS (AUS-10) for site governance applications.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) Scheme

As delineated in AUS-49, the following information must be submitted to the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) through the online form on the TGA Business Services (TBS) webpage (AUS-36):

Sponsor name and address
Sponsor declaration
Notification fee (See Regulatory Fees section)
Organization-nominated contact’s name, phone number, and email
An optional alternative contact, which may be chosen from the contacts for the agent or sponsor organization submitting the CTN. An Australian contact number is required to be listed with either the primary sponsor contact or the alternate sponsor contact
Protocol number
Expected trial start and completion dates
Potential use of restricted goods
Study title and description, which must be a minimum of 250 characters (spaces included) and up to a maximum of 2,500 characters
“This Trial” check boxes indicating whether the trial involves the use of a medicine, a medical device, and/or a biological. For a medicine or biological, additional information must be provided, such as dosage form, route of administration, indication, and the good manufacturing practice (GMP) license/clearance number of a relevant exemption
Trial type
Whether the trial is a first in human trial
Whether the trial, in part or as a whole, has been halted/stopped/withdrawn or rejected in another country due to safety concerns
Total number of trial participants
Therapeutic area
Investigational product (IP) details
Whether it is a multi-center trial
Whether the trial is being conducted in other countries
Preceding trial details
Trial site details
See AUS-49 for detailed descriptions of each required item.

Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) Scheme

AUS-89 states that the CTA scheme includes two (2) forms – Part 1: the CTA application (AUS-56), which is submitted along with supporting data, and Part 2: Notification of the conduct of a trial under the CTA scheme (AUS-57).

Part 1: the CTA application (AUS-56) requires general information (sponsor name, data details, and sponsor declaration) and details on the medicine (active ingredient)/biological be submitted to the TGA.

Part 2: Notification of the conduct of a trial under the CTA scheme (AUS-57) requires trial sponsor information (name and client ID code), the IP or biological, and the notification type, as well as trial and trial site details (title of study and trial type). The form also requires signed certifications from the sponsor, the principal investigator (PI), the ethics committee (EC) (Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC) in Australia), and the authority approving the conduct of the trial.

Ethics Committee Requirements

Per the G-CTHandbook, the EC and the institution are responsible for establishing what information should be provided in support of an application. The EC should request any additional information that it believes is necessary to undertake review of the proposed research. Unless advised otherwise, trial sponsors and researchers should use the Human Research Ethics Application (HREA) for submitting proposals for research involving humans to ECs.

AUS-46 indicates that the HREA assists researchers in considering the ethical principles of the G-NatlStmt in relation to their research. The G-NatlStmt requires that those who conduct and approve human research to consider:

How the research question/theme is identified or developed
The alignment between the research aims and methods
How the researchers and the participants will engage with one another
How the research data or information are to be collected, stored, and used
How the results or outcomes will be communicated
What will happen to the data and information after the project is completed
For more information on the HREA, see the Submission Process section.

The G-NatlStmt further specifies that in an application for review of their research, researchers should determine and state in plain language:

The research question or questions that the project is intended to explore
The potential benefit of exploring the question or questions including to whom that potential benefit is likely to flow, and whether that benefit is a contribution to knowledge or understanding, improved social or individual wellbeing, or the skill and expertise of researchers
The basis for that potential benefit as described in either relevant literature or a review of prior research unless, due to the novelty of the question, there is scarce literature or prior research
How the design and methods of the project will enable adequate exploration of the research questions and achieve the aims of the research
How the design of the project will maintain respect for the participants
Where relevant, that the research meets the requirements of any relevant regulations or guidelines authorized by law (such as those related to privacy and reporting requirements for disclosure of child abuse)
Whether or not the project has been reviewed by a formally constituted academic, scientific, or professional review process, and, if so, the outcome of that review
Research Governance

According to the G-NatlStmt, institutions should publish (such as on their website) clear policies and procedures for institutional authorization of research. See the Research GEMS system (AUS-55), the Ethical Review Manager (ERM) (AUS-8), and the Research Ethics and Governance Information System (REGIS) (AUS-10) websites for public health organization site-specific assessment (SSA) forms, which may differ between institutions and states or territories.

Clinical Protocol

The G-TrialsSOP indicates that where the investigator is responsible for the protocol development, the investigator must ensure the protocol follows the outline in the AU-ICH-GCP. Specific content of a protocol will vary depending on the research area, the level of risk to participants, the phase of the research and study design, and whether a medicinal product or a device or a therapeutic intervention is being researched. If satellite sites for a teletrial are involved in the study, no specific additional wording is required in the protocol, as relevant considerations will be addressed in other study-specific documents which may be annexed to the protocol.

The AU-ICH-GCP provides the following outline of the protocol:

General information (protocol title, identifying number, and date; contact information for the sponsor, medical expert, investigator(s), trial site(s), qualified physician(s), and laboratory and/or institutions involved in the study)
Background information
Objectives and purpose
Trial design
Selection, withdrawal, and treatment of participants
Assessment of efficacy
Assessment of safety
A description of the statistical methods to be used in the trial
Direct access to source data and documents
Quality control and quality assurance
Ethical considerations
Data handling and recordkeeping
Financing and insurance
Publication policy
Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the G-CTHandbook, the G-TrialsSOP, and AUS-86, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) is responsible for authorizing the supply of unapproved therapeutic goods for clinical trials under two (2) regulatory schemes—the Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) scheme and the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) scheme. According to the TGR, the G-CTHandbook, the G-TrialsSOP, and AUS-86, under either regulatory scheme, an ethics committee (EC) (Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC) in Australia) must approve research protocols. The G-NatlStmt further specifies that any research that involves greater than low risk must be reviewed by an EC.

AUS-87 notes that some ECs and institutions may need the TGA’s acknowledgement before beginning their own approval processes. In these cases, the TGA will accept a CTN submission while the sponsor gets the required approvals from the EC and institution. However, it is the sponsor’s responsibility to ensure that all relevant approvals and authorizations are in place before commencement of the trial. Additionally, AUS-88 indicates that the sponsor can, either following TGA approval or in parallel with the TGA’s evaluation, contact their chosen EC to initiate ethics review of the CTA scheme trial proposal. However, trials can only commence once both TGA and EC approvals have been received.

According to AUS-40, all public and private health organizations must also undertake a site-specific assessment (SSA) of each research project. Per the G-TrialsSOP, the SSA and ethics review may occur in parallel.

Regulatory Authority Approval

No timeline information is available for applications under the CTN or CTA schemes.

For information on how to check the status of a CTN, see AUS-49. Per AUS-88, stakeholders seeking more information on the CTA process are encouraged to contact the TGA at clinical.trials@health.gov.au.

Ethics Committee Approval

The EC review and approval process timeline varies by institution. However, according to the G-NatlStmt, the institutional EC must implement standard operating procedures that promote good ethics review, including timely consideration of applications.

Research Governance

The G-GovHndbk indicates that ethical review and site assessment, both components of research governance, are two (2) distinct processes relating to the ethical approval and institutional authorization of research involving humans. However, because evidence of EC approval is a component of the site assessment process, institutional authorization of a research project cannot be given until EC approval has been provided. The G-TrialsSOP further specifies that EC approval must be obtained and submitted to the research governance officer (RGO) of each participating institution before institutional authorization is granted.

While some parts of the research governance review must occur after the EC review, the G-GovHndbk recommends that as part of the national approach to single ethical review, institutions establish processes to facilitate parallel review. Project documentation processes related to site assessment may be considered as falling into these categories:

That which can be assessed independent of ethical review, such as evidence of research qualifications, supporting department approval forms, contracts, budgets, and insurance and indemnity documents
That which is subject to ethical review, but can be submitted prior to or in parallel with ethical review to enable independent assessment of other documentation, such as initial project application documents
That which can only be assessed subsequent to ethical approval, such as approved project application documents, fully signed regulatory documents, and a certificate of ethical approval
See the G-GovHndbk for additional National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) guidance on best practices in the governance of multicenter human research as part of the national approach to single ethical review.

The NHMRC also developed the GPP-SiteAssess to help institutions streamline the research governance process and shorten clinical trial start-up times. See the GPP-SiteAssess for more information.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the G-TrialsSOP, the G-CTHandbook, and AUS-86, clinical trials involving unapproved therapeutic goods can only commence under the Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) scheme or the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) scheme. According to the G-GovHndbk and the G-TrialsSOP, under either scheme, both institutional ethics committee (EC) (Human Research Ethics Committees (HRECs) in Australia) approval and research governance authorization are required before a research project can commence at a site.

AUS-87 notes that for trials conducted under the CTN scheme, it is the sponsor’s responsibility to have all relevant approvals in place. All approvals must be obtained before supplying the unapproved therapeutic good(s) in the clinical trial. After submission of the online CTN form with payment of the relevant fee is made to the TGA, the clinical trial is deemed to have been notified. Once this notification occurs, the sponsor may lawfully supply the unapproved therapeutic good(s) for the purposes of the trial. A CTN acknowledgement from the TGA is not required before the trial can begin recruiting.

AUS-89 indicates that the sponsor must send a trial commencement notification form (AUS-57) to the TGA within 28 days of commencing supply of the good(s) at each site for each new trial conducted under the CTA scheme, as well as additional sites in ongoing CTA trials.

Research Governance

Per the G-GovHndbk, research must be governed by the institution at all stages of a project. Ethical review and site assessment, both components of research governance, are two (2) distinct processes relating to the ethical approval and institutional authorization of research involving humans. According to AUS-40, all public and private health organizations must undertake a site-specific assessment (SSA) of each research project. This allows the institution to consider whether the project is suitable for the site, and whether it has the capacity to conduct the research at that site. Pursuant to the G-NatlStmt, authorization of research by the institution should consider, but not re-review, any issues raised during the ethics review of the research proposal, and each institution should have a process or processes for assessing the risk level of the research. These processes may involve seeking advice from relevant clinical or administrative staff, members of an EC, or a full meeting of the EC. All research should be developed, reviewed, authorized, conducted, and monitored in accordance with a research governance framework as described in an institution’s policy. For more information on institutional responsibilities, see the Site/Investigator Selection section.

The G-TrialsSOP states that in the case of a teletrial, the principal investigator (PI) must ensure that a robust site assessment is undertaken that fully quantifies the capabilities of each satellite site to inform the extent to which trial related activities can be delegated to the site. This may include a pre-commencement assessment before a specific trial is proposed so that the process of trial start up is expedited when a suitable trial is identified.

Per the G-TrialsSOP, prior to a study’s commencement, the PI must:

Submit the primary site's Clinical Trial Research Agreement (CTRA), EC approval, the SSA form, evidence of any relevant good clinical practice (GCP) training, and any other required documentation to the institution’s research governance officer (RGO)
Ensure all documentation and correspondence pertaining to the submission and approval processes is filed in the study master file (SMF) (see Appendix 8 of the G-TrialsSOP)
Ensure each satellite site completes and submits to their RGO a clinical trial sub-contract and an SSA form
Await site specific RGO authorization before any study related activity can occur at that site
Ensure the satellite site files all documentation in the satellite site study file (SSSF)
The G-TrialsSOP further states that prior to the initiation of a study, the investigator must also mutually agree with the sponsor on a scheduled date, time, and location for a study initiation visit at the participating site to ensure the site is prepared to commence the study. In the case of a teletrial, this may be at the primary site only, or could include (remotely) the satellite site(s) as determined by the study complexity by the sponsor/PI.

See the G-TrialsSOP for more information on site initiation requirements for primary and satellite sites.

The G-GovHndbk further indicates that in the national approach to single ethical review, site assessment and project authorization are the responsibility of each institution participating in a multicenter human research project while ethical review is provided by a single EC using certified ethical review processes. Each institution collaborating in a multicenter project utilizing the outcome of a single ethical review must individually authorize the commencement of research at their institution. To avoid unnecessary delays in research commencing at all collaborating centers and sites, each institution should consider relevant local matters prior to or in parallel with ethical review.

Clinical Trial Agreement

As delineated in the AU-ICH-GCP, the sponsor must sign an agreement between all involved parties, including investigators, institutions, contract research organizations, and others for documentation purposes. Further, the sponsor should obtain the investigator’s/institution's agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with good clinical practice, with the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and given approval/favorable opinion by the EC
Comply with procedures for data recording and reporting
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain the trial-related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution these documents are no longer needed
The sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement.

For the purposes of the G-TrialsSOP, the CTRA for the primary site and the sub-contract for each satellite site constitute part of a research governance application, which is submitted to the RGO. The CTRA covers matters such as confidentiality, intellectual property, ownership of data, insurance, and indemnity. The Medicines Australia CTRA (see AUS-38) is the recommended standard form.

Clinical Trial Registration

The G-NatlStmt requires that clinical trials be registered on a publicly accessible register complying with international standards before recruitment of the first participant. For information on these standards, see the World Health Organization (WHO)’s International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) (AUS-67). Per AUS-15, the Australian and New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ANZCTR) (AUS-12) recommends applying for registration at the same time as ethics submission.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

According to the G-SftyRpt, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Australia’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical trial participant administered a medicinal product and that does not necessarily have to have a causal relationship with this treatment
Adverse Reaction (AR) – Any untoward and unintended response to an investigational medicinal product related to any dose administered
Unexpected Adverse Reaction (UAR) – An adverse reaction, the nature or severity of which is not consistent with the applicable product information (e.g., investigator's brochure (IB) for an unapproved investigational medicinal product)
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Reaction (SAR) – Any adverse event/adverse reaction that results in death, is life-threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity, or is a congenital anomaly or birth defect
Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR) – An adverse reaction that is both serious and unexpected
Significant Safety Issue (SSI) – A safety issue that could adversely affect the safety of participants or materially impact the continued ethical acceptability or conduct of the trial
Urgent Safety Measure (USM) – A measure required to be taken in order to eliminate an immediate hazard to a participant’s health or safety (Note: This type of SSI can be instigated by either the investigator or sponsor and can be implemented before seeking approval from ethics committees (ECs) or institutions)
Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

As specified in the G-SftyRpt, the investigator is responsible for recording and assessing all AEs that occur at the site. The investigator is also required to inform the sponsor of all SAEs, and all USMs instigated by the site, within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event. All safety critical events must be reported to the sponsor, and for reported deaths, the investigator should supply the sponsor with any additional requested information. Further, the investigator must report to the institution all SSIs and SUSARs arising from the local site within 72 hours of becoming aware of the event.

However, the G-TrialsSOP states that the investigator must also report any SUSARs to the sponsor within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event, and USMs instigated by the investigator or site must be reported to the sponsor within 72 hours. Furthermore, the investigator must report all other significant issues to the sponsor within 15 days of instigating or becoming aware of the event. The investigator must notify the sponsor promptly regarding any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to participants. The investigator must also be available to meet with the sponsor to discuss study progress, issues, and safety.

The G-TrialsSOP requires that within 72 hours of instigating or becoming aware of the event, the investigator must notify the institution of:

USMs
SUSARs arising from the local site
Any information received from the sponsor that may be new and have an impact on the continued ethical acceptability of the trial or may indicate the need for amendments to the trial protocol, including monitoring of safety
The G-TrialsSOP indicates that for satellite site(s) in teletrials, staff must report safety issues directly to the sponsor as per the timelines specified in the clinical trial protocol and the safety monitoring plan or similar document, in the same way as the primary site. Certified copies of the relevant safety reports/documentation generated at the satellite site must be sent to the primary site for filing in a study master file.

According to the G-TrialsSOP, the principal investigator (PI) must ensure that study staff, including those at teletrial satellite sites, are trained in the protocol, investigator’s brochure (IB), study procedures, and AE/SAE reporting. The PI must also ensure that a system for safety reporting duties is in place for all study staff. For more information on investigator responsibilities related to standard operating procedures (SOPs), see the G-TrialsSOP.

Sponsor Responsibilities

As delineated in the G-SafetyDataMgt, the G-SftyRpt, and the G-CTHandbook, the sponsor is required to expedite reporting of SUSARs to the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA).

The G-SafetyDataMgt indicates that other situations requiring expedited reporting may include information that might materially influence the benefit-risk assessment of an investigational product, or that would be sufficient to consider changes in the administration or conduct of a clinical trial.

According to the G-SftyRpt and the G-TrialsSOP, expedited reporting requires the sponsor to file reports to the TGA in the following specified timelines:

For an Australian SUSAR that is fatal or life-threatening, immediately, but no later than seven (7) calendar days, with any follow-up information within eight (8) calendar days
For all other Australian SUSARs, no later than 15 calendar days after becoming aware of the case
The G-SftyRpt and the G-TrialsSOP further indicate that the TGA, the EC, and investigators must also be notified of all SSIs that adversely affect the safety of participants, or materially impact the continued ethical acceptability or conduct of the trial. SSIs that meet the definition of a USM should be reported within 72 hours, and all other SSIs should be reported within 15 calendar days of the sponsor being made aware of the issue. It is strongly recommended that the sponsor contact the TGA within 24 hours of a USM being taken, and if initial contact is by telephone, it should be followed up with a written notification provided by e-mail within 72 hours. See AUS-53 for additional information on SSIs and USMs.

Per the G-SftyRpt, submitting individual reports of AEs, SAEs, and SUSARs to ECs, institutions, and investigators are no longer required. However, according to the G-TrialsSOP, the sponsor must provide the EC with an updated IB at least annually that supports trial oversight, depicts a clear picture of the evolving trial safety profile, and provides evidence that the sponsor is conducting its safety monitoring appropriately.

The G-CTHandbook and the G-SftyRpt further require the sponsor to maintain records of all other single case AEs and submit them to the TGA upon request. The G-CTHandbook indicates that the TGA does not require sponsors to submit individual SUSARs from outside Australia. Sponsors should continually monitor the safety of their clinical program and advise the TGA of any SSIs that arise from their analysis of overseas reports, or of any action that has been taken by another country’s regulatory agency. Investigators and ECs should also be informed of this information, and sponsors must be able to provide the TGA with the clinical details of any individual overseas AE reports if requested.

According to the G-TrialsSOP, the sponsor’s plans for safety data monitoring should be documented in a safety monitoring plan or similar document and be given to the PI prior to commencement of the clinical trial. The plan must be continually reviewed and updated during the trial, as real-time assessments of safety data are performed, and outcomes are made available.

Other Safety Reports

The G-SftyRpt delineates that the sponsor must provide the EC with an annual safety report including a clear summary of the evolving trial safety profile. The annual safety report should generally include:

A brief description and analysis of new and relevant findings
For investigational products (IPs) not on the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG) (AUS-22), a brief analysis of the safety profile of the IP and its implications for participants
A brief discussion of the implications of the safety data to the trial’s risk-benefit ratio
A description of any measures taken or proposed to minimize risks
A Development Safety Update Report (DSUR) or other similar document may also serve as the annual safety report. See the G-SftyRpt for more information.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

As per the G-CTHandbook, all SUSARs from Australian sites must be reported to the TGA using one (1) of three (3) formats:

The Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) functionality, which allows sponsors to submit AE reports directly from their system to the TGA (more information can be found at AUS-26)
The online reporting form, which can be accessed from AUS-51
The CIOMS Form I (AUS-4) or the TGA’s Blue Card Adverse Reaction Reporting Form (AUS-3)
Per AUS-3, the Blue Card form may be emailed to adr.reports@tga.gov.au or mailed to Pharmacovigilance and Special Access Branch, PO Box 100, Woden ACT 2606. More information about reporting to the TGA may be found on the Adverse Event Management System (AEMS) (AUS-7).

See AUS-37 for the SSI/USM reporting form, which should be submitted to clinical.trials@health.gov.au.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

As per the AU-ICH-GCP, the G-NatlStmt, and the G-TrialsSOP, the investigator(s) is responsible for submitting progress reports to the ethics committee (EC) (known as Human Research Ethics Committee in Australia) annually, or more frequently if requested. The AU-ICH-GCP and the G-TrialsSOP state that if there are significant changes in trial conduct or safety, the investigator should submit a written report to the sponsor, the EC, and where applicable, the institution. The G-NatlStmt indicates that at regular periods (reflecting the degree of risk, and at least annually), researchers should provide reports to the relevant EC(s) and institution(s), including information on:

Progress to date
The security of project-related data and information
Compliance with the approved proposal
Compliance with any conditions of approval
According to the G-NatlStmt, progress report forms should be designed to collect information that can provide meaningful assistance to reviewers in determining whether continuation of ethics approval is warranted. See the G-NatlStmt for more details.

Final Report

AUS-88 indicates that for trials conducted under the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) scheme, the CTA clinical trial completion advice form (AUS-58) is used to notify the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) after the trial has been completed at all sites. There is no fee for this notification. AUS-58 indicates that upon completion, the form may be emailed to the TGA at clinical.trials@tga.gov.au (preferred) or faxed to 02 6232 8112.

Per AUS-49, for trials conducted under the Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) scheme, a completion advice should be submitted through the TGA Business Services (TBS) webpage (AUS-36). The completion advice must include the date the trial was completed at all Australian sites, as well as the completion reason. AUS-87 further notes that there is no fee to submit a CTN completion. See AUS-49 for additional information on the completion advice.

The AU-ICH-GCP and the G-TrialsSOP indicate that the investigator should provide the EC with a final clinical study report. As per the G-TrialsSOP, the investigator must also notify the research governance officer that the trial has been terminated/closed. At the completion of the project, a report with the same information as described above for progress reports (per G-NatlStmt) must also be provided to the relevant EC(s) and institution(s), but it should include information on the outcome of the completed research.

Additionally, the TGA has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH)’s Topic E 3: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (AUS-81). For more information, see AUS-81.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
As per the AU-ICH-GCP and the G-TrialsSOP, a sponsor is defined as an individual, company, institution, or organization that takes responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a clinical trial.

In accordance with the AU-ICH-GCP, Australia permits a sponsor to transfer any or all of its trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO). Any trial-related duties and functions transferred to a CRO should be specified in a written agreement, and the sponsor should ensure oversight of such transferred responsibilities. Any trial-related duties and functions not specifically transferred to and assumed by a CRO are retained by the sponsor. The sponsor retains overall responsibility for the trial data’s quality and integrity, as well as the conduct of the trial. As stated in the G-TrialsSOP, the sponsor is also responsible for ensuring that appropriate approvals are obtained prior to the commencement of the clinical trial, that conditions of any approvals are adhered to during the course of the clinical trial, and that the ethics principles of research merit and integrity, justice, beneficence, and respect are applied to the conduct of clinical trials.

According to the G-CTHandbook, if the investigator initiates and organizes the trial, the role of trial sponsor is assumed. If another party (such as a pharmaceutical company) provides the IP or other support for an investigator-led trial, that party is not required to assume the sponsor role.

As per the G-CTHandbook and the G-TrialsSOP, a sponsor must be an Australian entity.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Overview

As set forth in the AU-ICH-GCP, the sponsor should select the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical trial, taking into account the appropriateness and availability of the study site and facilities. The sponsor must also ensure that the investigator(s) are qualified by training and experience. Prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s) and the institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and an investigator’s brochure.

According to the G-TrialsSOP, the principal investigator (PI) must ensure that all required staff who assist with the clinical trial are informed about and trained on the protocol, any investigational product (IP), and their research-related duties and functions. This can be in the form of an initiation meeting held by any communication means, including face-to-face, videoconference, telehealth, etc. The PI must also have sufficient time to properly conduct and complete the research within the specified period, as well as an adequate number of qualified staff and adequate facilities for the foreseen duration of the research. When a teletrial is being conducted, the PI, who is always at the primary site and never at the satellite site, remains responsible for the trial across the cluster. For more information on PI site staff training and qualification requirements, see the G-TrialsSOP.

See AUS-64 for additional clinical trial and researcher resources.

Research Governance

The G-NatlStmt indicates that institutions must ensure that any human research for which they are responsible is designed, reviewed, approved, authorized, conducted, and monitored in accordance with the G-CodeConduct and the G-NatlStmt, along with any policies that they have developed that form part of their research governance framework. Each institution should be satisfied that the human research for which it is responsible meets both relevant ethical standards and scholarly or scientific standards, and ensure that those conducting the research (i) are either adequately experienced and qualified, or supervised; (ii) understand the need to assess risks to their own safety and that of participants; and (iii) are aware they are free to withdraw from research on conscientious grounds. Institutions should publish (such as on their website) clear policies and procedures for ethics review and approval and institutional authorization of research. They may establish their own processes for ethics review of research or use the review processes of another institution or external ethics review body.

Per AUS-63, the Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care developed the National Clinical Trials Governance Framework (AUS-63), which embeds clinical trials into routine health service provisions and strengthens the clinical and corporate governance arrangements for parties that deliver clinical trials. All jurisdictions have agreed to implement the framework in health service organizations, meaning the organizations will be assessed concurrently for clinical and corporate services and clinical trial service provisions. The framework describes the systems and processes that should be in place to implement an effective governance system considering local needs, values, and the context in which services are provided. For more information about implementation timing and assessments under the National Safety and Quality Health Service (NSQHS) standards, see AUS-63.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

As per the G-CTHandbook and the G-TrialsSOP, a sponsor must be an Australian entity.

Data Safety Monitoring Boards

G-DSMB indicates that the sponsor may establish a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) (also referred to as Data Monitoring Committees (DMCs)) to review accumulating trial data in order to monitor the progress of a trial. The role of a DSMB is to provide advice on safety and/or trial conduct issues by making recommendations to the sponsor or trial steering committee on whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial. Per the AU-ICH-GCP, the DSMB should have written standard operating procedures (SOPs) and maintain written records of all its meetings.

According to the G-TrialsSOP, the sponsor may utilize a DSMB or independent individuals (e.g., a medical monitor) to:

Review accruing trial safety data in either an unblinded or blinded manner to assess treatment exposure
Access, assess, and review emerging efficacy data for the trial
Assess the balance of risks and benefits within the trial
Document the outcome of these reviews
Additionally, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) has adopted the European Medicines Agency (EMA)’s Guideline on Data Monitoring Committees (AUS-78), which discusses the key issues involved when sponsors include DSMBs as part of their trial management. For more information, see AUS-78.

Multicenter Studies

As delineated in the AU-ICH-GCP, in the event of a multicenter trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol that was agreed to by the sponsor and the TGA (if required), and that was approved by the ethics committee (EC)
The case report forms (CRFs) capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
The responsibilities of coordinating investigator(s) and the other participating investigators are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, on complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and on completing the CRFs
Communication among investigators is facilitated
As noted in the G-TeletrialPrncpls, Australian jurisdictions agree that “traditionally” multicenter clinical trials assume one (1) PI per geographic site, differing from teletrials. However, for the purposes of teletrials, multicenter trials may include some sites that have satellite sites supervised under teletrial guidance, including the Clinical Oncology Society of Australia (COSA)’s Australasian Tele-trial Model (AUS-2), the G-TeletrialPrncpls, and the G-TrialsSOP. Sponsor responsibilities in teletrials, as described in the G-TrialsSOP, are discussed throughout the Australia profile alongside other clinical trial regulations and guidance. See each section of the Sponsorship topic for additional applicable information.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Insurance

The AU-ICH-GCP and the G-NatlStmt state that the sponsor should provide insurance in accordance with applicable regulatory requirements. In addition, according to the G-NatlStmt, institutions must ensure that sponsors have insurance arrangements in accordance with applicable regulatory requirements. The federal documents cited here do not explicitly require insurance.

Per the G-GovHndbk, the institution and investigator are responsible for managing risks of any proposed research, including providing appropriate insurance coverage.

Compensation

Injury or Death

According to the G-NatlStmt, institutions must ensure that sponsors have indemnity and compensation arrangements in accordance with applicable regulatory requirements, and that arrangements are in place to compensate trial participants for harm resulting from negligence in research. The AU-ICH-GCP further indicates that the sponsor must explain to participants the compensation and/or treatment available to them in the event of trial-related injuries. The federal documents cited here do not explicitly require indemnity.

The G-TrialsSOP states that if the investigator is notified or becomes aware that a trial participant intends to make a claim against the institution or sponsor for injuries arising as a result of participating in a clinical trial undertaken at the institution (or any of the satellite sites under supervision by the institution in a teletrial), the investigator must promptly notify the following parties in writing that such an action is intended:

The institution’s authority
The coordinating principal investigator (CPI)/principal investigator (PI)/associate investigator, as relevant
The sponsor
In addition, if the institution is notified or becomes aware that a trial participant intends to make a claim for compensation against the institution or sponsor for injuries arising as a result of participating in a clinical trial undertaken at the institution (or any of the satellite sites under supervision by the institution in a teletrial), the institution must promptly notify the institution’s insurer in writing that such an action is intended.

See AUS-39 for indemnity and injury compensation guidelines for commercially-sponsored trials.

Trial Participation

The G-NatlStmt states that it is generally appropriate to reimburse participants for the costs associated with taking part in research including travel, accommodations, and parking. Sometimes participants may also be paid for time involved. However, payment may not be disproportionate to the time involved, or include other incentives that encourage participants to take risks. Further, payment or reimbursement decisions should consider customs and practices of the community in which the trial will be conducted.

According to the G-ResearchPayment, any proposal for payment of participants should be considered by the ethics committee (EC) reviewing the research. The EC should be provided with a payment plan that includes:

A rationale for the proposed payments
The method and timing of any disbursements, including how they have been calculated, and
Information about how prospective participants will be advised of the provision of payment
Payment of participants is ethically appropriate if it is equitable and proportionate to the burden of the research, and does not:

Undermine a participant’s capacity to provide voluntary and informed consent
Unduly influence a participant to accept a risk or burden that is greater than they would otherwise accept in everyday living or to compromise their fundamental values
Unduly influence a participant to make false representations about or conceal information that is relevant to their eligibility for the research, their contribution to the research, or the risks related to participation
To minimize the likelihood of a payment acting as an undue influence, the G-ResearchPayment further indicates that payment of participants should generally be limited to reimbursement of documented expenses and remuneration for time and inconvenience. Payment may be offered as an incentive to participate in cases where the research offers little or no benefit to individuals or where the research requires the participation of target populations that are difficult to recruit. In these cases, adequate processes must be in place to promote valid consent. For more information and examples of payment models, see the G-ResearchPayment.

According to the AU-ICH-GCP, payments to a participant should be prorated and not wholly contingent on completion of the trial by the participant.

Post-Trial Access

Per the G-NatlStmt, researchers must make clear to the participant if there are any intended therapeutic benefits from the trial, and if the treatment will be available only through participation in the trial. In addition, researchers must make it clear to the participant whether they will have access to the treatment or information they received after completion of the trial.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As per the AU-ICH-GCP, the sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, focusing on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that includes:

Identifying processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results during protocol development
Identifying risks to critical trial processes and data
Evaluating the identified risks against existing risk controls
Deciding which risks to reduce and/or accept
Documenting quality management activities and communicating to those involved in or affected by these activities
Periodically reviewing risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant
Describing the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarizing important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken in the clinical study report
The G-RBMgmtMntring provides further guidance on the application of risk-based trial processes, particularly as a reference to sponsors of non-commercial trials.

The AU-ICH-GCP further indicates that the sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol, the AU-ICH-GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor is responsible for obtaining agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial-related sites, source data/documents, reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. The sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, and QC should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been correctly processed. Any agreements between the sponsor and investigator, or with any other parties involved in the clinical trial, should be written, either within the protocol or in a separate agreement.

As per AUS-74, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) has adopted certain guidelines released by the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH), the European Medicines Agency (EMA), and the United States Food & Drug Administration (FDA) regarding quality management and technical aspects of clinical trials. See each of these documents for additional details:

ICH Guideline E8 (R1) on General Considerations for Clinical Studies (AUS-76)
Guideline on Strategies to Identify and Mitigate Risks for First-in-Human Clinical Trials with Investigational Medicinal Products (AUS-77)
Guideline on Clinical Trials in Small Populations (AUS-79)
ICH E11(R1) Guideline on Clinical Investigation of Medicinal Products in the Pediatric Population (AUS-80)
Use of Electronic Health Record Data in Clinical Investigations - Guidance for Industry (AUS-82)
Considerations for the Use of Real-World Data and Real-World Evidence to Support Regulatory Decision-Making for Drug and Biological Products - Guidance for Industry (AUS-83)
ICH Topic E 10 Choice of Control Group in Clinical Trials (AUS-84)
ICH Topic E 9 - Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials (AUS-85)
See AUS-74 for more information on, as well as a list of, the international scientific guidelines adopted by the TGA.

Responsible Research Conduct

The G-CodeConduct outlines principles, responsibilities, and expectations for institutions and researchers to facilitate responsible research practices. Australian institutions must establish and maintain good governance and management practices for responsible research conduct. In addition, researchers must comply with the relevant laws, regulations, disciplinary standards, ethics guidelines, and institutional policies related to responsible research conduct. Compliance with the G-CodeConduct is a requirement to receiving funding from the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) or the Australian Research Council (ARC).

The G-CodeBreaches describes the preferred model for institutions to use to investigate and manage potential code breaches, to determine any corrective actions, and when a finding of research misconduct may be made. The Australian Research Integrity Committee uses the G-CodeBreaches as a guide for reviewing how NHMRC- and ARC-funded institutions manage potential code breaches.

The G-RptBreachGCP requires the sponsor to notify the reviewing ethics committee (EC) (Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC) in Australia) within seven (7) days of confirming a serious breach of good clinical practice (GCP). A serious breach is defined as one that is likely to affect to a significant degree: the safety or rights of a trial participant or the reliability and robustness of the data generated in the trial. Sponsors should also develop documented processes for managing serious breaches. The G-TrialsSOP notes that although all deviations or breaches of the protocol must be reported by the investigator to the sponsor, only serious breaches must be reported to the EC. Serious breaches should also be reported by the principal investigator (PI) to their institution, as they may have an impact on medico-legal risk, the responsible conduct of research, or adherence to contractual obligations.

The supplementary guidance G-RptBreachGCP should be read alongside the G-CodeConduct and the G-CodeBreaches.

Monitoring Requirements

As part of its QA system, the AU-ICH-GCP notes that the sponsor should ensure the trial is monitored and audited. The purpose of the audit should be to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, the AU-ICH-GCP, and other applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor should appoint auditors to review the clinical trial. The sponsor should ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience, and the auditor’s qualifications should be documented. The sponsor must also ensure that the audit is conducted in accordance with its own SOPs and that the auditor’s observations are documented.

Per the G-TrialsSOP, the PI must ensure audit/inspection readiness throughout the study, have oversight of any audit or inspection of the trial at both primary and satellite sites, and ensure any deficiencies identified through audit or inspection are actively managed to ensure continuous improvement.

The TGR further states that the sponsor must provide a written assurance to comply with any trial-related requests by an authorized TGA officer(s), which includes allowing inspection of clinical trial sites. The PI is required to comply with requests and answer any questions the authorized officer(s) may have. According to the G-GCP-Inspect, clinical trial sites that have been notified of a GCP inspection should prepare for the inspection by:

Ensuring their authorizing institution, trial sponsor, and clinical team are advised of the inspection (the G-GCP-Inspect notes that although the TGA does not require that the sponsor be informed, there is generally a requirement in the contract between the site and the sponsor to share this type of information)
Ensuring access for the inspectors to clinical trial records and source documents is arranged for the time of the inspection
Ensuring their IT processes allow them to grant view-only access to the inspectors
The G-GCP-Inspect adds that ECs and trial sponsors are not included in the scope of the TGA’s GCP inspection program. The site PI can invite other personnel, including the sponsor and institution/EC representative(s), to attend the inspection opening and closing meeting. See the Scope of Assessment section, the G-GCP-Inspect, and AUS-90 for more information on TGA inspections.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

As per the G-CTHandbook, procedures following the TGA’s revocation of approval under the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) scheme or a breach of the conditions of the Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) scheme would be determined on a case-by-case basis based on the impact on participants and their ongoing safety. The AU-ICH-GCP states that if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor should promptly inform the investigator(s), institution(s), the EC, and the TGA. The sponsor should provide the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. Additionally, as indicated in the G-CTHandbook, the sponsor must notify all sites in the case of a multicenter trial. A lead EC in a multicenter study will need to liaise with the sites and the sponsor when determining which, if any, are affected and the actions they need to apply.

According to the G-TrialsSOP, if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended for any reason, the investigator must:

Promptly inform the sponsor, EC, research governance officer, associate investigator, any satellite site, and the TGA by providing a detailed written explanation of the premature termination or suspension
Promptly inform the trial participant and the participant’s primary care physician where the trial participant has consented, of the termination or suspension and, if applicable, of the investigational product (IP) and dose that was administered
Assure appropriate therapy and follow up for the participant’s continued care
As per the G-NatlStmt, if an institution or EC considers that suspension of research is necessary, the instruction to stop should come from the management of the institution. Where ethics approval for a research project is suspended:

The institution must ensure that the researcher promptly suspends the research and makes arrangements to meet the needs of participants, such as ensuring that appropriate counselling support or the provision of standard care continues
The research may not be resumed unless: (i) the research is modified to provide sufficient protection or participants or address the concerns that led to the suspension; or (ii) the researcher establishes to the satisfaction of the EC that continuation of the research will not compromise participants’ welfare; and (iii) the institution authorizes the continuation of the research
The G-NatlStmt further indicates that if ethics approval for a research project is withdrawn, the researcher must promptly halt the research, make arrangements to meet the needs of participants, and notify the institution that these steps have been taken.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

When using electronic trial data handling systems, the sponsor must ensure and document that the electronic data processing system conforms to its established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistent intended performance, and that standard operating procedures (SOPs) are maintained for using these systems. Refer to the AU-ICH-GCP for additional information.

The Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) has adopted the United States Food & Drug Administration (FDA)’s Use of Electronic Health Record Data in Clinical Investigations - Guidance for Industry (AUS-82). For more information, see AUS-82.

Records Management

According to the G-CodeConduct and the G-DataInfoMgt, institutions must provide access to facilities for the safe and secure storage and management of research data, records, and primary materials.

The G-DataInfoMgt requires that institutional policy include guidance for managing research data and primary materials that addresses the following:

Ownership, stewardship, and control
Storage, retention, and disposal
Safety, security, and confidentiality
Access by interested parties
Furthermore, institutional policies on ownership of, and access to, databases and archives must require that:

Researchers are informed of relevant confidentiality agreements and restrictions on the use of research data
Computing systems are secure
Information technology personnel understand their responsibilities for network security and access control
Those holding primary material, including electronic material, understand their responsibilities for security and access
The G-CodeConduct and the G-DataInfoMgt further state that researchers must retain clear, accurate, secure, and complete records of all research including research data and primary materials. Additionally, the G-NatlStmt indicates that when multiple researchers are collaborating on the collection, storage, and/or analysis of data or information, they should agree to the arrangements for custodianship, storage, retention, and destruction of those materials, as well as the rights of access, rights to analyze/use and re-use the data or information, and the right to produce research outputs based upon them.

According to the G-TrialsSOP, the investigator must maintain adequate source documents and trial records, including all key observations on each of the trial participants. The investigator must also store all trial related documents in a study master file (SMF) and take measures to prevent accidental or premature destruction of these documents. In the case of a teletrial, the SMF is stored at the primary site, and the principal investigator (PI) must have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator(s), institution, and satellite site(s) before, during, and after the trial. The PI must also establish the maintenance rules of the SMF and relationship between the primary site’s SMF and any satellite site study files. For more information on the SMF, see the G-TrialsSOP.

As set forth in the annotated AU-ICH-GCP, the TGA requires that the sponsor retain records for 15 years following the completion of a clinical trial. However, product liability is the overriding consideration, and the sponsor should be able to produce records at any time, including possibly beyond the life of a product, in the event of an adverse event claim. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed.

The TGA has adopted the European Medicines Agency (EMA)’s Guideline on the Content, Management and Archiving of the Clinical Master File (Paper and/or Electronic) (AUS-75). For more information on the clinical trial master file, see AUS-75.

Data Management Plan

According to the G-NatlStmt and the G-DataInfoMgt, researchers should create a data management plan, which should be developed as early as possible in the research process and should include details regarding:

Physical, network, system security, and any other technological security measures
Policies and procedures
Contractual and licensing arrangements and confidentiality agreements
Training for members of the project team and others, as appropriate
The form in which the data or information will be stored
The purposes for which the data or information will be used and/or disclosed
The conditions under which access to the data or information may be granted to others
What information from the data management plan, if any, needs to be communicated to potential participants
The G-NatlStmt states that in the data management plan, researchers should also clarify whether they will seek extended or unspecified consent for future research, or permission from a review body to waive the requirement for consent. In addition, the security arrangements specified in the plan should be proportional to the risks of the research project and the sensitivity of the information.

In accordance with the G-NatlStmt, researchers must comply with all relevant legal and regulatory requirements that pertain to the data or information collected, used, or disclosed as well as the conditions of the consent provided by participants. Data, information, and biospecimens used in research should be disposed of in a manner that is safe and secure, consistent with the consent obtained and any legal requirements, and appropriate to the research design.

The G-NatlStmt indicates that in the absence of justifiable ethical reasons and to promote access to the benefits of research, researchers should collect and store data, or information generated by research projects, in such a way that they can be used in future research projects. A justification must be provided when a researcher believes there are valid reasons for not making data or information accessible. More details are provided in the G-NatlStmt.

In addition, for details related to secondary use and sharing of data or information, see the G-NatlStmt.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Responsible Parties

Per AUS-70, the PrivacyAct regulates how certain health service providing organizations collect and handle personal information, including health information. It also includes provisions that generally allow an individual to access information held about them.

According to the PrivacyAct, agencies and organizations as defined in the PrivacyAct must comply with the Act and the Australian Privacy Principles (APP), found in Schedule 1, and are referred to as APP entities.

Data Protection

Per the PrivacyAct’s APP, an APP entity must have a clearly expressed and up-to-date policy about the management of personal information by the entity. Individuals must have the option of not identifying themselves or of using a pseudonym, and an APP entity must not collect sensitive information about an individual unless the individual consents to the collection of the information.

The APP outline further requirements for the consideration of personal information privacy; the collection of personal information; dealing with personal information; the integrity of personal information; and access to, and correction of, personal information. For the full list of APP, see Schedule 1 of the PrivacyAct. Additionally, see the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC)’s guidelines on the APP (G-APP) for more information.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

The PrivacyAct’s APP indicate that if an APP entity holds personal information about an individual that was collected for a particular purpose, the entity must not use or disclose the information for another purpose unless consent is obtained from the individual. There are limited exceptions to this requirement, which can be found in Schedule 1 of the PrivacyAct.

AUS-70 notes that in certain circumstances, the PrivacyAct permits the handling of health information and personal information for health and medical research purposes, where it is impracticable for researchers to obtain individuals' consent, recognizing: the need to protect health information from unexpected uses beyond individual healthcare, and the important role of health and medical research in advancing public health. To promote these ends, the OAIC approved the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC)’s legally binding guidelines, G-PrivacyAct95 and G-PrivacyAct95A, which researchers must follow when handling health information for research purposes without individuals' consent. The guidelines also assist ethics committees (ECs) (known as the Human Research Ethics Committees in Australia) in deciding whether to approve research applications. The guidelines are:

G-PrivacyAct95, which sets out procedures that ECs and researchers must follow when personal information is disclosed from a federal agency for medical research purposes
G-PrivacyAct95A, which provides a framework for ECs to assess proposals to handle health information held by organizations for health research (without individuals' consent). It ensures that the public interest in the research activities substantially outweighs the public interest in the protection of privacy
See the PrivacyAct, the G-PrivacyAct95, and the G-PrivacyAct95A for more information.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Australian clinical trials, valid consent is required from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the AU-ICH-GCP and the G-NatlStmt. According to the AU-ICH-GCP, if requirements specified in the G-NatlStmt appear to differ from those specified in the AU-ICH-GCP, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) recommends compliance with the G-NatlStmt.

As per the AU-ICH-GCP, the informed consent form (ICF) (also referred to as a participant information sheet and consent form (PICF) in Australia) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by an institutional ethics committee (EC) (known as a Human Research Ethics Committee in Australia) and kept on file before the trial commences. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.)

According to the G-TrialsSOP, the principal investigator (PI) for any research project retains overall responsibility for ensuring a participant’s consent has been obtained in the correct manner prior to the participant’s entry into the project. This includes where consent is obtained from participants at satellite sites in a teletrial. The PI can delegate the duty for obtaining consent to a suitably qualified associate investigator at the PI’s discretion, but the PI remains responsible for any delegated activity. Furthermore, the investigator must ensure that institutional authorization is obtained, inclusive of approval by an appropriate EC, for all written information and any other media used to provide information to potential participants prior to their usage to obtain consent from any participant.

The AU-ICH-GCP states that the investigator must provide detailed research study information to the participant or legal representative/guardian. The ICF content should be as non-technical as practical and understandable to the participant or legal representative/guardian. The G-TrialsSOP further indicates that the ICF and relevant EC-approved participant information documents can be provided in person, by telehealth, or by telephone and email or weblink. If informed consent is obtained by telephone, this must be recorded on the ICF and in the participant’s health and medical record, and/or source document, stating (as an example): “The protocol was discussed with [participant’s name] via telephone on [DD/MM/YYYY].”

According to the G-TrialsSOP, e-consent may be the preferable option for teletrials, as consent signatures can be obtained contemporaneously at both primary and satellite sites. For more information on obtaining consent using telehealth, see the G-TrialsSOP.

As per the AU-ICH-GCP, the ICF content should be clearly presented orally, or in a written language that is easy to understand, and commensurate with the age and comprehension level of the research participant. The participant and legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate. According to the G-NatlStmt, information should also be presented to potential participants in ways that help them make informed choices. To this end, the researcher should take into account cultural and language barriers, the need for accurate and reliable translation, the participant’s educational background, the participant’s age and maturity level, and whether there is a visual, hearing, or communication impairment. See AUS-65 for researcher guidance on how to talk to potential participants.

Furthermore, as delineated in the G-TrialsSOP, the PI or delegate must assess the potential participant’s understanding of what they are agreeing to, that they are aware of the purpose of the study, what will be involved, and any risks that may exist. The participants must demonstrate that they fully understand the implications of decisions that may be made within the course of the research.

Per the G-NatlStmt, where a potential participant lacks the capacity to consent, a person or appropriate statutory body exercising lawful authority for the potential participant should be provided with relevant information and decide whether the individual will participate. That decision must not be contrary to the individual’s best interests. Researchers should bear in mind that the capacity to consent may fluctuate, and even without that capacity, people may have some understanding of the research and the benefits and burdens of their participation. Additionally, within some communities, decisions about participation in research may involve not only individuals but also properly interested parties such as formally constituted bodies, institutions, families, or community elders. See the Emergencies, Vulnerable Populations, Children/Minors, Prisoners, and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations.

As per the AU-ICH-GCP, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive their legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representative(s) from liability for negligence. Per the G-NatlStmt, no person should be subject to coercion or pressure in deciding whether to participate in a trial.

The G-NatlStmt indicates that consent may be:

Specific – limited to the specific project under consideration
Extended – given for the use of data or tissue in future research projects that are: (i) an extension of, or closely related to, the original project; or (ii) in the same general area of research (for example, genealogical, ethnographical, epidemiological, or chronic illness research)
Unspecified – given for the use of data or tissue in any future research
The G-NatlStmt further states that when unspecified consent is sought, its terms and wide-ranging implications should be clearly explained to potential participants. When such consent is given, its terms should be clearly recorded. Subsequent reliance, in a research proposal, on existing unspecified consent should describe the terms of that unspecified consent. See the G-NatlStmt for more information on consent to future use of data and tissue in research. Additionally, see the Consent for Specimen section for more information on consent related to use of tissue in research.

Re-Consent

According to the AU-ICH-GCP and the G-TrialsSOP, any change in the ICF that is relevant to the participant’s consent should be approved by the EC prior to implementing any changes. The participant or legal representative/guardian should also be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial. The communication of this information should be documented. The G-TrialsSOP further specifies that unless there is a significant safety concern, ECs will not usually require that participants be recontacted immediately since there are potential implications related to blinding. If approved by the EC, continued consent may be obtained verbally and recorded in the participant’s medical records and relevant documents. Re-consent may also be obtained by telephone if approved by an EC.

The G-NatlStmt notes that in some research, consent may occasionally need to be renegotiated or confirmed, especially where projects are complex or long-running, or participants are vulnerable. Research participants should be told if there are changes to the terms to which they originally agreed and given the opportunity to continue their participation or withdraw.

Language Requirements

Pursuant to the G-NatlStmt, methods for presenting research information to participants should take into account the need for accurate and reliable translation into the participant’s first language or dialect, as well as culture and its effects on the communication process. According to the G-TrialsSOP, in cases where translation is required, a professional interpreter should facilitate the process.

Documenting Consent

The AU-ICH-GCP and the G-TrialsSOP state that the participant or legal representative(s)/guardian(s) and the investigator(s) must sign and date the ICF. Where the participant is unable to read or the legal representative/guardian is unable to read, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. After the following steps have occurred, the witness should sign and date the ICF attesting that the information in the ICF was accurately explained to, and apparently understood by the participant or legal representative/guardian:

The written ICF and any other written information to be provided to the participant is read and explained to the participant or legal representative/guardian
The participant or legal representative/guardian has orally consented to the participant’s involvement in the trial, and has signed and dated the ICF, if capable of doing so
Before participating in the study, the participant or legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF.

The G-TrialsSOP further indicates that where consent is obtained by telehealth or telephone, once the ICF is signed and dated by both the participant and the investigator (and any other person present, for example an interpreter), the participant must select the statement identifying that consent was obtained by telehealth or telephone with the name of the investigator. Similarly, the investigator must select the statement identifying that consent was obtained by telehealth or telephone with the name of the participant. For more information on informed consent documentation, see the G-TrialsSOP.

According to the G-NatlStmt, consent may be expressed orally, in writing, or by some other means (such as return of a survey or conduct implying consent), depending on the nature, complexity, and level of risk of the research, and the participant’s personal and cultural circumstances.

Waiver of Consent

The G-NatlStmt specifies that although voluntary consent is a requirement for every trial, the EC may approve an alteration to the consent requirements. Limited disclosure to participants of the aims and/or methods of research may be justifiable. However, only an EC can review and approve research that involves active concealment or planned deception or aims to expose illegal activity.

Per the G-NatlStmt, it may be appropriate to use an opt-out approach for participant recruitment when obtaining explicit consent is neither practical nor feasible. An opt-out approach is a method used in the recruitment of research participants where information is provided to the potential participant regarding the research and their involvement, and where their participation is presumed unless they take action to decline to participate. An EC may approve the use of an opt-out approach for research if the study satisfies all of the following conditions:

It involves only low risk to participants
The public interest in the proposed activity substantially outweighs the public interest in the protection of privacy
The research activity is likely to be compromised if the participation rate is not near complete, and the requirement for explicit consent would compromise the necessary level of participation
Reasonable attempts are made to provide participants with appropriate plain language information explaining the nature of the information to be collected, the purpose of collecting it, and procedure to decline participation or withdraw from the research
A reasonable time period is allowed between the provision of information to prospective participants and the use of their data so that an opportunity for them to decline to participate is provided before the research begins
A mechanism is provided for prospective participants to obtain further information and decline to participate
The data collected will be managed and maintained in accordance with relevant security standards
There is a governance process in place that delineates specific responsibility for the project and for the appropriate management of the data
The opt-out approach is not prohibited by state, federal, or international law
According to the G-NatlStmt, only an EC may grant a waiver of consent for research using personal information in medical research, or personal health information. However, other review bodies may grant a waiver of consent for other research. In order to help maintain public confidence in the research process, each institution must make publicly accessible summary descriptions of all its research projects for which consent has been waived.

As stated in the G-NatlStmt, an EC may waive the requirement for consent if the study satisfies all of the following conditions:

Involvement in the research carries no more than low risk to participants
The benefits from the research justify any risks of harm associated with not seeking consent
It is impracticable to obtain consent (for example, due to the quantity, age, or accessibility of records)
There is no known or likely reason for thinking that participants would not have consented if they had been asked
There is sufficient protection of their privacy
There is an adequate plan to protect the confidentiality of data
There is, where practicable, a plan for making information arising from the research available to participants in cases where the results have significance for their welfare
The possibility of commercial exploitation of derivatives of the data or tissue will not deprive the participants of any financial benefits to which they would be entitled
The waiver is not prohibited by state, federal, or international law
See the G-NatlStmt for more information on conditions for the opt-out approach or waiving consent.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Based on the AU-ICH-GCP and the G-NatlStmt, both the informed consent discussion and the written informed consent form (ICF) (also referred to as a participant information sheet and consent form (PICF) in Australia) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

That the trial involves research
The purpose of the trial
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
The trial procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The participant's responsibilities
Those aspects of the trial that are experimental
The reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant and, when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
The reasonably expected benefits, including to the wider community. When there is no intended clinical benefit to the participant, the participant should be made aware of this
The alternative procedure(s) or course(s) of treatment that may be available to the participant, and their important potential benefits and risks
The compensation and/or treatment available to the participant in the event of trial-related injury, including provision of services to participants adversely affected by the research
The amounts and sources of funding for the research, as well as financial or other relevant declarations of interests of researchers, sponsors, or institutions
The anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
The anticipated expenses, if any, to the subject for participating in the trial
That participation in the trial is voluntary and that the participant may refuse to participate or withdraw from the trial, at any time, without penalty or loss of benefits to which the subject is otherwise entitled
Any implications of withdrawal from the trial, and whether it will be possible to withdraw data
How the research will be monitored
That the monitor(s), the auditor(s), the ethics committee (EC), and the regulatory authority(ies) will be granted direct access to the participant's original medical records for verification of clinical trial procedures and/or data, without violating the confidentiality of the participant, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and regulations and that, by signing a written ICF, the participant or legal representative/guardian is authorizing such access
That records identifying the participant will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and/or regulations, will not be made publicly available. If the results of the trial are published, the participant’s identity will remain confidential
That the participant or legal representative/guardian will be informed in a timely manner if information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant's willingness to continue participation in the trial
The person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
Contact details of a person to receive complaints and of the researchers
The foreseeable circumstances and/or reasons under which participation in the trial may be terminated
The expected duration of participation in the trial
The approximate number of participants involved in the trial
The likelihood and form of dissemination of the research results, including publication
Any other relevant information, including research-specific information required under other chapters of the G-NatlStmt
Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the AU-ICH-GCP and the G-NatlStmt, Australia’s ethical standards protect participants’ rights and promote respect for human beings, research merit and integrity, justice, and beneficence. The G-NatlStmt further recognizes that state or territory authorities may have additional statutes regarding the use of human tissues, guardianship, and illegal and unprofessional conduct. Furthermore, a participant’s rights must be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) (also referred to as a participant information sheet and consent form (PICF) in Australia).

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As stated in the AU-ICH-GCP and the G-NatlStmt, the participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled. The G-TrialsSOP further specifies that participants may withdraw their consent at any time without giving a reason.

Per the G-NatlStmt, the participant should be informed of any implications of withdrawal and whether it is possible to withdraw data.

The Right to Information

As per the AU-ICH-GCP and the G-NatlStmt, a potential research participant or the legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation or treatment in the case of injury, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

According to the AU-ICH-GCP and the G-NatlStmt, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. Privacy is also subject to national, state, and territory laws, including the PrivacyAct. As per the G-TrialsSOP, if telehealth is used, all measures must be taken to ensure privacy and confidentiality of the participant’s identity.

See the Personal Data Protection section for more details on personal information collection and handling requirements.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The AU-ICH-GCP and the G-NatlStmt state that the research participant or the legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the individual responsible for addressing trial-related inquiries and/or rights.

AUS-45 provides information on who the participant or the legal representative/guardian may contact regarding a concern with the clinical trial. The options include contacting the researcher(s) directly, the ethics committee (EC) (known as Human Research Ethics Committee in Australia), the institution, the healthcare complaints entity in the state or territory, or the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). Concerns may also be reported to the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA). See AUS-45 for more information on the types of concerns that may be reported to each party.

See the G-NatlStmt for more information on institutional requirements for receipt of complaints.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The AU-ICH-GCP (which upholds the Declaration of Helsinki (AUS-52)) and the G-NatlStmt clearly state that a research participant’s right to safety and protection of health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

See the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
The AU-ICH-GCP states that in emergency situations, when prior consent of the participant is not possible, the consent of the legal representative/guardian, if present, should be requested. When prior consent of the participant is not possible, and the legal representative/guardian is not available, enrollment of the participant should require measures described in the protocol and/or elsewhere, with documented approval/favorable opinion by the ethics committee (EC) (known as the Human Research Ethics Committee in Australia), to protect the rights, safety, and well-being of the participant and to ensure compliance with applicable regulatory requirements, including the G-NatlStmt. Per the AU-ICH-GCP, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible, and consent to continue and other consent should be requested, as appropriate.

The G-NatlStmt recognizes that in emergency care research, recruitment into a research project often must be achieved rapidly. Where the research involves emergency treatment and meets the G-NatlStmt’s requirements for research involving people highly dependent on medical care, consent for the research may be waived. See the Vulnerable Populations section for more information on people highly dependent on medical care, and the Documentation Requirements section for more details on waiver of consent.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Overview

The AU-ICH-GCP characterizes vulnerable populations as those who may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation in a clinical trial, or of a retaliatory response for not participating. Examples are members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable subjects include patients with incurable diseases, residents of nursing homes, unemployed or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situations, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent. Per the G-NatlStmt, people who may be involved in illegal activities, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, ethnic minority groups, and people in other countries are other groups for which specific ethical considerations are required.

People Highly Dependent on Medical Care

According to the G-NatlStmt, research involving people who are highly dependent on medical care may be approved where:

It is likely that the research will lead to increased understanding about, or improvements in, the care of this population
The requirements of relevant jurisdictional laws are taken into account
Either: 1) any risk or burden of the proposed research to this particular participant is justified by the potential benefits, or 2) where participants have capacity to consent, any risk or burden is acceptable to them and justified by the potential benefits of the research
The G-NatlStmt indicates that when a researcher is also the treating health professional, it should be considered whether an independent person should seek the consent of potential participants who are highly dependent on medical care. In addition, the participant and/or the participant’s relatives and an authorized representative should be informed of the participant’s inclusion in the research and of the option to withdraw from it without any reduction in quality of care.

The G-NatlStmt states that when neither the potential participant nor the legal representative/guardian can consider the proposal and give consent, an ethics committee (EC) (known as the Human Research Ethics Committee in Australia) may, having taken account of relevant jurisdictional laws, approve a research project without prior consent if:

There is no reason to believe that, were the participant or legal representative/guardian to be informed of the proposal, the participant would be unwilling to consent
The risks of harm to individuals, families, or groups linked to the participant, or to their financial or social interests, are minimized
The project is not controversial and does not involve significant moral or cultural sensitivities in the community
And, where the research is interventional, these additional conditions apply:

The research supports a reasonable possibility of benefit over standard care
Any risk or burden of the intervention to the participant is justified by its potential benefits
Inclusion in the research project is not contrary to the interests of the participant
The G-NatlStmt further provides specific requirements related to conducting research on participants in terminal care, which is characterized by the short remaining life expectancy of the participants and their vulnerability to unrealistic expectations of benefits. Terminal care research should be designed so that the benefits of research justify any burden, discomfort, or inconvenience to the participants; the prospect of benefit from research participation is not exaggerated; the needs and wishes of participants to spend time as they choose are respected; and the entitlement of those receiving palliative care to participate is recognized.

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples

The G-NatlStmt states that research involving Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples must be reviewed and approved by an EC and include assessment and advice from: people who have networks with and/or knowledge of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples; and people familiar with the culture and practices of the relevant Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community(ies). In addition, the researcher should ensure the following:

Research methods are respectful and acknowledge the cultural distinctiveness of participating Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities and groups
There is evidence of support for the research project from relevant Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities or groups and the research methodology engages with their social and cultural practices
The research methods provide for mutually agreed upon mechanisms for recruitment, information provided about the research, notification of participants’ consent and of research progress, and final reporting
Procedures and actions have been taken to monitor and, where appropriate, minimize any potential negative consequences of the proposed research
For more information on research involving Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples, see the G-AboriginalEthic, the G-EthicsRsrchTrackII, and the G-AIATSISCode.

People in Dependent Groups

The G-NatlStmt cautions that dependent or unequal relationships that might compromise the voluntary character of a participant’s decision should be considered. Examples of such relationships include caregivers and people with chronic conditions/disabilities; health care professionals and their patients; teachers and their students; prison authorities and prisoners; governmental authorities and refugees; employers/supervisors and their employees (including members of police and Defense Forces); and service-providers and especially vulnerable communities to whom the services are provided. Where potential participants are especially vulnerable or powerless, consideration should be given to the appointment of a participant advocate.

Per the G-NatlStmt, when a researcher and potential participant have a pre-existing relationship, it should be considered whether an independent person should seek the consent of the participant.

People Who May Be Involved in Illegal Activities

The G-NatlStmt provides specific requirements related to conducting research on participants who may be involved in illegal activities. Research that is intended to study or expose, or likely to expose, illegal activity should be reviewed and approved by an EC. Researchers should be satisfied that participants who are subject to criminal justice processes are aware that the research may discover illegal activity and do not have unrealistic expectations of benefit from their participation. Finally, research designed to expose illegal activity should only be approved where the illegal activity bears on the discharge of a public responsibility or the fitness to hold public office, the risks are justified by the benefits, and the research meets the other requirements in the G-NatlStmt.

People in Other Countries

The G-NatlStmt states that research involving people in other countries must be reviewed and approved by an EC and comply with the G-NatlStmt. The research design, protocol, and consent process should take into consideration the local cultural values, yet still result in participants being treated with no less respect and protection than what is provided in the G-NatlStmt. Additional details are provided in the G-NatlStmt.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
The FamLawAct defines a child as a person who is under 18 years of age. Per AUS-71, different states or territories may have specific legislation about a parent/guardian providing consent to medical treatment for a minor; otherwise, the FamLawAct has provisions that may apply.

According to AUS-71, children under 16 cannot give legal consent, which must be given by a parent/guardian, but they can and should be involved in the decision. Young people over 16 can give legal consent to medical treatment; however, they usually cannot provide legal consent to participate in research until they are 18. Nonetheless, some ethics committees (ECs) (known as Human Research Ethics Committees in Australia) do allow mature young people under 18 to give their consent for some kinds of research.

The AU-ICH-GCP states that minors should be informed to the extent compatible with their maturity and understanding, and if capable, they should sign and personally date the informed consent form (ICF) (also referred to as a participant information sheet and consent form (PICF) in Australia). In accordance with the G-NatlStmt, consent requirements for conducting clinical trials follow the general requirements listed in the Required Elements section.

The G-NatlStmt states before including a child or young person in research, researchers must establish that there is no reason to believe that such participation is contrary to that child's or young person's best interest. Furthermore, a child or young person's refusal to participate in research should be respected wherever the child or young person has the capacity to give consent to that same research. Where a child or young person lacks this capacity, the child or young person’s refusal may be overridden by the judgement of the parent/guardian as to what is in the child's best interest.

The G-NatlStmt indicates that an EC may approve research to which only the child or young person consents if it is satisfied that:

The child or young person is mature enough to understand the relevant information and give consent
The research involves low risk
The research aims to benefit children or young people
The child or young person is estranged or separated from the parent/guardian and the researcher ensures the child or young person’s safety, security, and well-being in the research conduct; or it would be contrary to the best interests of the child or young person to seek consent from the parent/guardian, and the researcher ensures the child or young person’s safety, security, and well-being in the research conduct
In addition, as stated in the G-NatlStmt, children and young people who are not of sufficient maturity to consent should only participate in clinical studies when: the research is likely to advance knowledge about the health or welfare of, other matters relevant to, children and young people; or their participation is indispensable to the conduct of the research. When considering the inclusion of children and young people in research, the researchers and EC must consider their level of maturity to ensure adequate protections for their welfare.

Assent Requirements

AUS-71 indicates that when a parent/guardian gives consent for their child to take part in a clinical trial, researchers may also ask the child for their permission or agreement, also referred to as assent. The researchers must do this in an age-appropriate manner. Both the parent/guardian and the child should have the chance to ask any questions before agreeing to participate and at any time during a trial. In order for a child to provide their consent or assent they must:

Understand the research process
Understand the purpose of the trial
Be told what they are expected to do or what will happen to them during the trial
AUS-71 further states that children should be able to express their views and any worries they might have about participating in a trial, and have their questions answered. Children should always be given information in a form that they can understand. Additionally, AUS-80 indicates that refusal to assent or withdrawal of assent by a child should be respected. Over the course of a clinical study, it may be necessary to reassess the assent of a child in recognition of their advancing age, evolving maturity, and competency, especially for long-term studies or studies that may require sample retention. During clinical studies, it is required to obtain adequate informed consent for continued participation from pediatric participants once a child reaches the age of legal consent. Local regulations related to confidentiality and privacy of pediatric participants must be followed.

Furthermore, the G-NatlStmt states that except in cases involving standing parental consent, specific consent must be obtained from the child or young person whenever the child or young person has the capacity to make this decision, and either one (1) parent, except when the EC decides that the risks require the consent of both parents, or the child or young person’s parent/guardian.

Per the G-NatlStmt, researchers must respect the developing capacity of children and young people to be involved in decisions about participation in research. The child or young person's particular level of maturity has implications for whether consent is necessary and/or sufficient to authorize participation. However, it is not possible to attach fixed ages to each level of maturity, which may vary from child to child. The following guidelines on maturity and corresponding capacity to consent are provided:

Infants, who are unable to take part in discussion about the research and its effects
Young children, who are able to understand some relevant information and take part in limited discussion about the research, but whose consent is not required
Young people of developing maturity, who are able to understand the relevant information but whose relative immaturity means that they remain vulnerable; the consent of these young people is required, in addition to consent from a parent or guardian
Young people who are mature enough to understand and consent, and are not vulnerable through immaturity in ways that warrant additional consent from a parent or guardian
See the G-NatlStmt for more information on consent and assent involving children and young people.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
As per the G-NatlStmt, studies involving pregnant women, fetuses, and neonates require additional safeguards to ensure that the research assesses the risks to the pregnant women, fetuses, and neonates. The wellbeing and care of the woman who is pregnant and of her fetus always takes precedence over research considerations, and research involving a fetus or fetal tissue should be conducted in a manner that maintains a clear separation between the woman’s clinical care and the research. Additionally, research should be designed to minimize pain or distress for the fetus, include steps for monitoring for signs of fetal pain or distress, and include steps for suspending or ceasing the research if necessary.

In accordance with the G-NatlStmt, consent requirements for conducting clinical trials follow the general requirements listed in the Required Elements section. However, except for therapeutic innovative therapy cases, the process of providing information and obtaining consent for participating in research should be clearly separate from clinical care if the woman is pregnant and the fetus is in utero. Further, per the G-NatlStmt, the woman should be informed of the following:

That she should consider whether to seek consent to the proposed research from any other person (e.g., the other parent)
Whether it is possible to store the fetus or fetal tissues for later use in research
That she is free to withdraw her consent to the research at any time, whether before or after a termination or other loss of a fetus
Whether there is potential for commercial application of outcomes of the research, including the development of cell lines
That she will not be entitled to a share in the profits of any commercial applications
Whether fetal organs or stem cell lines developed from them will be exported to another country
In addition, the G-NatlStmt states that if, for research purposes, fetal cells are to be derived from the fetal tissue and stored or propagated in tissue culture, or tissues or cells are to be used in human transplantation, the woman's consent is required. Others whom the woman identifies may also need to be involved in decisions about these matters.

For requirements related to assisted reproductive technology, including research involving the creation of human embryos using precursor cells from a human embryo or a human fetus, see the G-EthicsART.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
The G-NatlStmt refers to prisoners and prison authorities as an example of people who may be in dependent or unequal relationships.

Per the G-NatlStmt, a research study involving people in dependent or unequal relationships (such as prisoners) should, wherever possible, invite prospective participants to discuss their participation with someone who is able to support them in making their decision. If prospective participants are especially vulnerable, researchers should consider appointing a participant advocate.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Cognitive Impairment, Intellectual Disability, or Mental Illness

The G-NatlStmt discusses the requirements for research involving participants with cognitive impairment, intellectual disability, and mental illness together, noting that many of the ethical issues they raise about research participation are similar. An ethics committee (EC) (known as Human Research Ethics Committee in Australia) must review and approve research involving such participants, except where the research uses collections of non-identifiable data and involves negligible risk.

Per the G-NatlStmt, the research design should take into account factors that may affect the capacity to receive information, to consent to the research, or to participate in it. Additionally, care should be taken to determine whether the participant’s cognitive impairment, intellectual disability, or mental illness increases the susceptibility to some forms of discomfort or distress. Ways of minimizing effects of this susceptibility should be described in the research proposal.

As delineated in the G-NatlStmt, the participant must consent if the participant has the capacity, or the participant’s legal representative/guardian must consent on behalf of the participant. Where a legal representative/guardian has given consent, the researchers still must explain to the participant what the research is about and what participation involves. If the participant recovers the capacity to consent, the researcher should offer the opportunity to continue participation or withdraw. Refusal or reluctance to participate in a research project should be respected.

The G-NatlStmt states that if the participant’s impairment, disability, or illness is temporary or episodic, researchers should seek consent when the condition does not interfere with the capacity to give consent. This consent should occur in the presence of a witness who is familiar with the participant, is independent from the research, and understands the research’s merits, risks, and procedures.

Research Involving Unconscious Persons

The G-NatlStmt states when prior consent is not possible for research involving unconscious persons, consent should be provided by the participant’s legal representative/guardian. However, relevant jurisdictional laws must be taken into account. Because of their extreme vulnerability, unconscious persons should be excluded from all but minimally invasive research, or in research designed both to be therapeutic for them and to improve treatment for the condition from which they suffer.

The G-TrialsSOP notes that as per the Declaration of Helsinki (AUS-52), for research involving participants who are physically or mentally incapable of giving consent (e.g., unconscious patients/participants), the study must be relevant to the physical or mental condition of the participant(s) that prevents them from being able to consent to participate in the study.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
According to the AU-ICH-GCP and the G-TrialsSOP, an investigational product (IP) is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes a product with a marketing authorization when used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form; when used for an unapproved indication; or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

The G-CTHandbook adds that an IP is any therapeutic good being tested or used as reference in a clinical trial. Therapeutic goods must be included in the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG) (AUS-22) before those goods can be lawfully imported into, exported from, or supplied in Australia. The Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) and the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) schemes provide for the lawful importation into and/or supply in Australia of unapproved therapeutic goods for use solely for experimental purposes in humans. When a product is included in the ARTG, the entry applies to a particular sponsor (i.e., the individual or company intending to supply the goods). If a same or similar product is imported by another company or individual it is considered “unapproved”.

As per the G-CTHandbook, unapproved therapeutic goods include:

Any medicine, biological, or medical device not entered on the ARTG, including any new formulation, strength or size, dose, name, indications, directions for use or type of container of a medicine already in the ARTG
Therapeutic goods already in the ARTG to be used in a manner not covered by the existing ARTG entry
Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Manufacturing

As specified in the TGAct and the G-CTHandbook, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) authorizes the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) (i.e., therapeutic goods being used in a clinical trial) in Australia. As per AUS-88 and AUS-49, the sponsor provides manufacturing and/or active ingredient information to the TGA in the clinical trial application under one (1) of the two (2) regulatory schemes—the Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) scheme or the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) scheme. AUS-49 indicates that as part of a CTN scheme application involving a medicine or biological, the sponsor must provide either the TGA-issued good manufacturing practice (GMP) license, the GMP certification (for overseas manufacturers), or a relevant exemption.

Pursuant to TGManuf, Australia adopted the Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S) Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products, PE 009-17 (AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide) regarding the manufacture of therapeutic goods. Per the AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide, the holder of a manufacturing authorization must manufacture IPs to ensure that they are fit for their intended use, comply with the requirements of the clinical trial authorization, and do not place participants at risk due to inadequate safety, quality, or efficacy. The production of IPs involves added complexity in comparison to marketed products and therefore requires personnel with a thorough understanding of, and training in, the application of GMP to IPs. For manufacturers to be able to apply and comply with GMP for IPs, cooperation between manufacturers and sponsors of clinical trials is required.

Additionally, the principles of the AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide on certification by an authorized person and batch release also apply to IPs for human use. Although the ultimate responsibility for the performance of a medicinal product over its lifetime, as well as its safety, quality, and efficacy, lies with the marketing authorization holder, the authorized person is responsible for ensuring that each individual batch has been manufactured and checked in compliance with national requirements in accordance with the requirements of the marketing authorization and with GMP.

See the AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide for detailed manufacturing requirements. Additionally, see AUS-95 for the TGA’s summary of the changes in version 17 of the AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide.

Import

The G-CTHandbook indicates that IPs may be imported and held under the direct control of the sponsor (importer) until the IPs are the subject of a notification to the TGA under the CTN scheme or an approval under the CTA scheme. The IPs must be kept in a warehouse or other properly secured area. There is no requirement for the CTN or CTA process to have been completed prior to importation of the clinical trial goods.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

According to the AU-ICH-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for providing the investigators with an investigator’s brochure (IB). The IB must contain all of the relevant information on the investigational product(s) (IPs), including significant physical, chemical, pharmaceutical, pharmacological, toxicological, pharmacokinetic, metabolic, and clinical information. The sponsor must ensure that an up-to-date IB is made available to the investigator(s), and the investigator(s) must provide an up-to-date IB to the ethics committee. (Note: In Australia, therapeutic goods being used in a clinical trial are IPs.)

According to the G-TrialsSOP, where the investigator contributes to the content and development of the IB, the investigator must ensure the IB follows the outline in the AU-ICH-GCP. The AU-ICH-GCP requires the IB to cover the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation parameters
Non-clinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects of IP in humans (pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; and regulatory and post-marketing experiences)
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator(s)
See Section 7 of the AU-ICH-GCP for detailed content guidelines.

Quality Management

As specified in the AU-ICH-GCP, the sponsor must ensure that the products are manufactured in accordance with Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP). Furthermore, the sponsor must maintain a Certificate of Analysis to document the identity, purity, and strength of the IP(s) to be used in the clinical trial.

Per the AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide, GMP ensures that products are consistently produced and controlled to the quality standards appropriate to their intended use and as required by the clinical trial authorization. A pharmaceutical quality system designed, set up, and verified by the manufacturer or importer should be described in written procedures, taking into account the guidance in Chapter 1 or Part I of the AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide. Manufacturers should maintain documentation including specifications and instructions; the IP order; manufacturing formulae and processing instructions; packaging instructions; and batch records. The product specifications and manufacturing instructions may be changed during development, but full control and traceability of the changes should also be maintained. The product specification file should be continually updated as development of the product proceeds, ensuring appropriate traceability to the previous versions.

See the AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide for more details on quality system and documentation requirements.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling must comply with the requirements set forth in the G-CTHandbook, the AU-ICH-GCP, and the AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide. (Note: In Australia, therapeutic goods being used in a clinical trial are IPs.) Per the AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide, as annotated by the G-CTHandbook, the following information must be included on the IP label:

Sponsor’s name, address, and phone number. The main contact details for information on the product, clinical trial, and emergency unblinding must be an Australian contact
Pharmaceutical dosage form, route of administration, and quantity of dosage units. For closed blinded trials, the labeling should include a statement indicating “placebo or [name/identifier] + [strength/potency]”
The batch and/or code number to identify the contents and packaging operation
A trial reference code, which should identify the particular trial site, unless provided elsewhere or its absence can be justified. The trial reference code used should also identify the Australian trial sponsor, unless provided as the main contact or its absence can be justified
The trial participant identification number/treatment number
Investigator’s name. The name of the principal investigator should appear on the label unless already included in a trial reference code or unless its absence can be justified
Directions for use
“For clinical trial use only” or similar wording
The storage conditions
The period of use (use-by date, expiry date, or re-test date as applicable) in month/year format and in a manner that avoids any ambiguity
“Keep out of reach of children” except when the product is not taken home by participants
The G-CTHandbook recognizes that in exceptional circumstances, it may not be possible to meet the requirements of Annex 13 of the AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide for labeling IPs. In this case, the sponsor must contact the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) (see AUS-23) if they wish to request a departure from the requirements of Annex 13.

In addition, the AU-ICH-GCP states that the IP must be coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable.

Per the G-CTHandbook, labeling is a manufacturing step under the TGAct. However, an exemption from the requirement to hold a manufacturing license may apply to certain persons identified within the TGR, to allow relabeling of the IP with name and address of the new sponsor. If there is a change of Australian trial sponsor, the clinical trial medication should be relabeled appropriately with the details of the new trial sponsor at the time of transfer. See the G-CTHandbook for more details on these manufacturing exemptions.

Additional details on IP labeling are provided in the G-CTHandbook and the AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

As stated in the AU-ICH-GCP, the sponsor must supply the investigator(s) with the investigational product(s) (IP(s)) (i.e., therapeutic good(s) being used in a clinical trial). The G-CTHandbook indicates that Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) approval through the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) scheme or notification through the Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) scheme must occur prior to supplying the IP(s) to the trial site(s).

The AU-ICH-GCP specifies that the sponsor must ensure the following:

Timely delivery of the IP(s)
Records maintained for IP document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction
A system for retrieving or disposing of IP(s) and documenting this retrieval or disposal
Written procedures including instructions for IP handling and storage, adequate and safe receipt of the IP(s), dispensing of the IP(s), retrieval of unused IP(s), return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor, and disposal of unused IP(s) by the sponsor
IP product quality and stability over the period of use
IP manufactured according to any application of the Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP)
Proper coding packaging, and labeling of the IP(s)
Acceptable IP handling and storage conditions and shelf-life
In addition, the AU-ICH-GCP states that the IPs must also be suitably packaged in a manner that will prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage. Refer to the AU-ICH-GCP for detailed sponsor-related IP requirements.

As per the G-TrialsSOP, responsibility for IP management and accountability at the trial site rests with the principal investigator (PI). However, the PI may delegate responsibility for IP management to the site pharmacist or, where a pharmacist is not available or involved, to an appropriately qualified person. The site pharmacist or the appropriately qualified person will undertake IP management at the primary site and/or the satellite site in a teletrial. The investigator, pharmacist, or appropriately qualified non-pharmacist must ensure the IP is used only in accordance with the approved protocol and confirm IP certification and all relevant trial approvals/notifications are in place before releasing the IP for dispensing to participants. Refer to the G-TrialsSOP for detailed investigator-related IP requirements.

The AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide indicates that the manufacturer or sponsor’s representative should destroy IPs only with prior written authorization by the sponsor. The arrangements for destruction of IPs must be described in the protocol. Any related arrangement between the sponsor and manufacturer should be defined in their technical agreement. Destruction of unused IPs should be carried out only after reconciliation of delivered, used, and recovered products and after investigation and satisfactory explanation of any discrepancies upon which the reconciliation has been accepted.

Record Requirements

According to the G-TrialsSOP, the investigator, pharmacist, or appropriately qualified non-pharmacist must maintain records of all IP management aspects. These records at a minimum should include: shipping documents; date of each transaction; quantities; batch/serial numbers; expiration dates/retest dates (if applicable); temperature logs showing the storage conditions of the IP throughout the trial period; the set of unique code numbers assigned to the IP and to the trial participant; and record of destruction/return.

As set forth in the AU-ICH-GCP, the sponsor must retain essential documents for 15 years following completion of the trial. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and institution(s) in writing when record retention is needed and when the trial-related records are no longer needed. Per the AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide, documents which are part of the product specification file must be retained for at least five (5) years. If the sponsor and the manufacturer are not the same entity, the sponsor must make appropriate arrangements with the manufacturer to fulfil the sponsor’s requirement to retain the clinical trial master file. Arrangement for retention of such documents and the type of documents to be retained should be defined in an agreement between the sponsor and manufacturer.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
In Australia, a specimen is referred to as a “biological” or a “human biospecimen.” According to the TGAct, a biological is made from, or contains, human cells or human tissues that are likely to be taken to:

Treat or prevent disease, ailment, defect, or injury
Diagnose the condition of a person
Alter the physiological processes of a person
Test the susceptibility of a person to disease
Replace or modify a person’s anatomy
The G-NatlStmt defines human biospecimen as any biological material obtained from a person, including tissue, blood, urine, sputum, and any derivative from these including cell lines.

Legislation in Australian states and territories do not use standard terminology, but generally refer to human biospecimens as “human tissue.”

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
Import

Per the G-NatlStmt, if a human biospecimen will be, or has been, imported for research, researchers must establish whether the human biospecimen was obtained in a manner consistent with the requirements of the G-NatlStmt and relevant Australian legislation. If this cannot be established, then the human biospecimen should not be used for research in Australia.

Per the G-CTHandbook, other legislation and requirements may impose restrictions on the import of therapeutic goods for clinical trials involving materials of biological origin (human, animal, plant, or microbial), genetically modified organisms, and other substances. See the G-CTHandbook for a non-exhaustive list.

Export

The G-NatlStmt states that a human biospecimen obtained in Australia may be sent overseas for research if its exportation is consistent with the original consent, and if ethics committee (EC) (known as a Human Research Ethics Committee in Australia) approval is obtained.

Per the G-SpecExport, a permit to export human body fluids, organs, and other tissue must be obtained from the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) when the volume of a container exceeds 50 mL. If exporting substances derived from human blood, a TGA permit is required regardless of the volume. The application form requires the reason for the request, which can include research purposes. See the G-SpecExport for more details on when export permits are required, and AUS-24 for the application forms.

Other Considerations

The G-TrialsSOP indicates that to ensure the integrity of biological samples has been maintained, there should be evidence of the chain of custody from their point of collection through processing, storage, transport, through to disposal, with evidence of appropriate storage and transit conditions. Equipment used for processing and storage of samples (e.g., centrifuges, fridges, and freezers) should be maintained by suitably qualified persons and periodically inspected, cleaned, and calibrated to the relevant International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standard according to local policy and manufacturer’s manuals. Additionally, the investigator must ensure all study staff, who have cause to handle or ship biological substances, hold a current certificate in the International Air Transport Association (IATA) Approved, Civil Aviation Safety Authority (CASA) Certified Dangerous Goods Packaging Course. The investigator must also ensure that documentation (e.g., receipts, shipping records, order forms, and proformas) related to handling and shipment of biological specimens is maintained and filed in the respective site file.

Additional details on import and export requirements are provided in the G-CTHandbook, the G-TrialsSOP, the G-SpecExport, and AUS-24.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 30, 2025
In accordance with the G-NatlStmt, prior to collecting human biospecimens, consent must be obtained from the participant or legal representative/guardian. The general requirements for consent must be met, including the investigator(s) obtaining ethics committee (EC) (known as Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC) in Australia) review and approval of the proposed consent, collection, processing, storage and distribution, and disposal. This requirement pertains to human biospecimens that are collected for a specific clinical research project or are placed into a biobank for future research use.

The G-NatlStmt states that before potential participants consent to donation of their biospecimens, they should be given sufficient information about:

The research for which their biospecimens will be used and, where extended or unspecified consent is sought, and sufficient information is provided to meet the general requirements of consent
How their biospecimens will be stored, used, and disposed of, including any processes to be adopted that respect their personal or cultural sensitivities
The extent to which their biospecimens will be reasonably identifiable, and how their privacy and confidentiality will be protected
Whether the biospecimen research is likely to provide information that may be important to their health or to the health of their blood relatives or their community; and, if such information is likely to be revealed, whether they have the choice to receive this information, whether they have the choice for it to be provided to their relatives or their community, and how these will be managed
Whether their biospecimens and associated data may be distributed to other researchers, including those outside Australia
Their right to withdraw consent for the continued use of their biospecimens or associated data in research, and any limitations that may be relevant to their withdrawal of consent
Any relevant financial or personal interests that those engaged in the collection, processing, storage and distribution, and use of their biospecimens may have
Any potential for commercial application of any outcomes of the research and how this will be managed and to whom the benefits, if any, will be distributed
As stated in the G-NatlStmt, human biospecimens that were previously obtained for clinical purposes and have been retained by an accredited clinical pathology service may be used if the identity of the donor is not needed. If the donor’s identity is needed, a request for the waiver of the consent requirement to use existing collections of human biospecimens can be submitted to an EC.

The G-NatlStmt indicates that where proposed research involving the use of human biospecimens may reveal information that may be important for the health of the donors, their relatives, or their community, researchers should prepare an ethically defensible plan to describe the management of any proposed disclosure or non-disclosure of that information. An EC must approve this plan. With regard to biospecimens post-mortem, any wish expressed by a person about the use of their biospecimens post-mortem should be respected. If no such wish is discovered, researchers seeking to obtain human biospecimens post-mortem should obtain consent from the person(s) authorized by relevant legislation.

Human Genetic Research Consent Requirements

The G-NatlStmt indicates that research results and information collected for genomic research may be significant for relatives of research participants. Research including genomics will generally require review by an EC. However, if no information that can identify an individual is used and no linkage of data is planned, the research may be considered low risk.

Per the G-NatlStmt, researchers must prepare and follow an ethically defensible plan to manage the disclosure or non-disclosure of genomic information of potential importance for the health of participants or their relatives. An EC must approve the plan. Where researchers consider that the results of the research must be provided to participants, the project should be designed to include the mandatory return of results and this condition should be clear in any informational materials. In considering the appropriate form and scope of consent, as well as the most appropriate process for obtaining consent, researchers should consider:

What information will be generated by the research
What may be discovered by the research
What will be deliberately excluded from the scope of the research
Which, if any, of the findings of the research will be communicated to participants and, if so, how
What the health implications are of the information for participants and their relatives
Whether there are any other implications for participants and their families by being given this information
The potential for the information generated by or used in the research to result in participants being re-identified
Whether information generated by the research will be shared with other research groups
Potential future use of information and biospecimens, including commercial applications
The G-NatlStmt further notes that consent specific to the research may not be required, or a waiver of the requirement for consent may be considered by an EC, if:

The data or information to be accessed was previously collected and either aggregated or had identifiers removed
Prior consent for the use of the data or information was provided under the scope of a research program that encompasses the proposed research project
Prior consent for the use of the data or information was provided in the clinical context for research that encompasses the proposed research project
Unspecified consent has been provided
In addition, researchers should consider how genomic research data or information will be stored in the event it is needed for future analysis/testing and disclosure to participants.

Requirements
(Legislation) Family Law Act 1975 (No. 53, 1975, Compilation No. 101) (FamLawAct) (Amended June 10, 2025)
Office of Parliamentary Counsel
(Legislation) National Health and Medical Research Council Act 1992 (No. 225, 1992, Compilation No. 16) (NHMRCAct) (Amended March 20, 2024)
Office of Parliamentary Counsel
(Legislation) Privacy Act 1988 (No. 119, 1988, Compilation No. 103) (PrivacyAct) (Amended June 10, 2025)
Office of Parliamentary Counsel
(Legislation) Therapeutic Goods (Manufacturing Principles) Determination 2020 (Compilation No. 4) (TGManuf) (Amended September 1, 2025)
Office of Parliamentary Counsel
(Legislation) Therapeutic Goods Act 1989 (No. 21, 1990, Compilation No. 89) (TGAct) (Amended September 5, 2025)
Office of Parliamentary Counsel
(Regulation) Therapeutic Goods Regulations 1990 (Statutory Rules No. 394, 1990, Compilation No. 127) (TGR) (Amended October 1, 2025)
Office of Parliamentary Counsel
(Guidance) AIATSIS Code of Ethics for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research (G-AIATSISCode) (2020)
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies
(Guidance) Australian Clinical Trial Handbook: Guidance on Conducting Clinical Trials in Australia Using ‘Unapproved’ Therapeutic Goods (G-CTHandbook) (Last Updated October 3, 2024)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Guidance) Australian Code for the Responsible Conduct of Research (G-CodeConduct) (2018)
National Health and Medical Research Council, Australian Research Council, and Universities Australia
(Guidance) Australian Privacy Principles Guidelines (G-APP) (Last Updated December 2022)
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
(Guidance) Data Safety Monitoring Boards (DSMBs) (G-DSMB) (2018)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Guidance) Ethical Conduct in Research with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples and Communities: Guidelines for Researchers and Stakeholders (G-AboriginalEthic) (August 2018)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Guidance) Ethical Guidelines on the Use of Assisted Reproductive Technology in Clinical Practice and Research 2017 (Updated 2023) (G-EthicsART) (April 17, 2023)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Guidance) Exporting Human Substances (G-SpecExport) (Last Updated November 1, 2023)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Guidance) Fees and Charges: Summary - From 01 July 2025 (G-FeesCharges) (Version 1.0) (July 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Guidance) Good Practice Process for Site Assessment and Authorisation Phases of Clinical Trial Research Governance (GPP-SiteAssess) (Version 2.3) (September 2016)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Guidance) Guide to Managing and Investigating Potential Breaches of the Australian Code for the Responsible Conduct of Research (G-CodeBreaches) (2018)
National Health and Medical Research Council, Australian Research Council, and Universities Australia
(Guidance) Guidelines Approved Under Section 95A of the Privacy Act 1988 (G-PrivacyAct95A) (2024)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Guidance) ICH Guideline for Good Clinical Practice, Annotated with TGA Comments (AU-ICH-GCP) (Last Updated August 29, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use and Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Guidance) Keeping Research on Track II (G-EthicsRsrchTrackII) (August 2018)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Guidance) Management of Data and Information in Research: A guide supporting the Australian Code for the Responsible Conduct of Research (G-DataInfoMgt) (2019)
National Health and Medical Research Council, Australian Research Council, and Universities Australia
(Guidance) National Health and Medical Research Council 2014 (updated 2024): Guidelines Under Section 95 of the Privacy Act 1988 (G-PrivacyAct95) (March 2024)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Guidance) National Principles for Teletrials in Australia (G-TeletrialPrncpls) (February 26, 2021)
Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Guidance) National Standard Operating Procedures for Clinical Trials, including Teletrials, in Australia (G-TrialsSOP) (February 26, 2021)
Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Guidance) National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human Research 2023 (G-NatlStmt) (Effective January 1, 2024)
National Health and Medical Research Council, and Australian Research Council, and Universities Australia
(Guidance) Note for Guidance on Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (CPMP/ICH/377/95), Annotated with TGA Comments (G-SafetyDataMgt) (July 2000)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Guidance) Payment of Participants in Research: Information for Researchers, HRECs and Other Ethics Review Bodies (G-ResearchPayment) (2019)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Guidance) Preparing for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Inspections (G-GCP-Inspect) (Last Updated July 2, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Guidance) Reporting of Serious Breaches of Good Clinical Practice (GCP) or the Protocol for Trials Involving Therapeutic Goods (G-RptBreachGCP) (2018)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Guidance) Research Governance Handbook: Guidance for the National Approach to Single Ethical Review (G-GovHndbk) (December 2011)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Guidance) Risk-based Management and Monitoring of Clinical Trials Involving Therapeutic Goods (G-RBMgmtMntring) (2018)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Guidance) Safety Monitoring and Reporting in Clinical Trials Involving Therapeutic Goods (G-SftyRpt) (November 2016)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Guidance) The PIC/S Guide to GMP for Medicinal Products – Version 17 (AU-PIC-S-GMP-Guide) (September 1, 2025)
Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S) and Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
Additional Resources
(Document) Australasian Tele-Trial Model: Access to Clinical Trials Closer to Home Using Tele-Health (AUS-2) (Version 7.0) (September 19, 2016)
Clinical Oncology Society of Australia (COSA) Regional and Rural Group
(Document) Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) Form - User Guide (AUS-49) (Version 1.4) (May 2024)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Document) National Certification Scheme: Institutions with Certified Ethics Review Processes (AUS-68) (Last Updated August 25, 2025)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Document) Transition to New GMP Requirements for Medicinal Products: A Notice About the Implications of Adopting the PIC/S Guide to GMP PE009-17 (AUS-95) (Version 1.0) (August 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(International Guidance) Considerations for the Use of Real-World Data and Real-World Evidence to Support Regulatory Decision-Making for Drug and Biological Products - Guidance for Industry (AUS-83) (Adopted by the TGA February 27, 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (AUS-52) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Guideline on Clinical Trials in Small Populations (AUS-79) (Overseas Effective Date February 1, 2007)
European Medicines Agency
(International Guidance) Guideline on Data Monitoring Committees (AUS-78) (Overseas Effective Date January 2006)
European Medicines Agency
(International Guidance) Guideline on Strategies to Identify and Mitigate Risks for First-in-Human Clinical Trials with Investigational Medicinal Products (AUS-77) (Overseas Effective Date September 1, 2007)
European Medicines Agency
(International Guidance) Guideline on the Content, Management and Archiving of the Clinical Master File (Paper and/or Electronic) (AUS-75) (Adopted by the TGA July 15, 2019)
European Medicines Agency
(International Guidance) ICH E11(R1) Guideline on Clinical Investigation of Medicinal Products in the Pediatric Population (AUS-80) (Adopted by the TGA June 26, 2024)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Guideline E8 (R1) on General Considerations for Clinical Studies (AUS-76) (Adopted by the TGA June 26, 2024)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Topic E 10 Choice of Control Group in Clinical Trials (AUS-84) (Overseas Effective Date January 2001)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Topic E 3: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (AUS-81) (Overseas Effective Date July 1996)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Topic E 9 - Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials (AUS-85) (Overseas Effective Date September 1998)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Use of Electronic Health Record Data in Clinical Investigations - Guidance for Industry (AUS-82) (Adopted by the TGA February 27, 2023)
U.S. Food & Drug Administration, U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) About Us (AUS-32) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Application for a Permit to Export Human Substances (AUS-24) (Last Updated December 15, 2023)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Apply for Ethics Approval for a Clinical Trial (AUS-41) (Last Updated September 23, 2025)
Australian Clinical Trials, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Australian Clinical Trial Reforms (AUS-91) (Last Updated April 9, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (AUS-12) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Webpage) Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG) (AUS-22) (Current as of November 14, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Clinical Trial Notification (CTN) Scheme (AUS-87) (Last Updated April 9, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Clinical Trial Research Agreements (AUS-38) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Medicines Australia
(Webpage) Clinical Trials (AUS-47) (Last Updated May 6, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health and Aged Care
(Webpage) Concerns About a Clinical Trial (AUS-45) (Last Updated September 23, 2025)
Australian Clinical Trials, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Contact Us (AUS-23) (Last Updated December 2, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) CTA Scheme Forms (AUS-89) (Last Updated August 29, 2024)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Electronic Submission of Individual Case Safety Reports (AUS-26) (Last Updated October 18, 2019)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Ethical Review Manager (ERM) Applications Login Page (AUS-8) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Queensland Government, Australia, State Government of Victoria, Australia, and Mater Research
(Webpage) Get in Touch with Us (AUS-11) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Clinical Trials in Australia (AUS-14) (Last Updated August 7, 2025)
Australian Clinical Trials, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Inspection Program (AUS-90) (Last Updated August 29, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Health and Medical Research (AUS-70) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
(Webpage) How to Talk to Potential Clinical Trial Participants (AUS-65) (Last Updated October 24, 2023)
Australian Clinical Trials, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) How We Regulate Australian Clinical Trials That Use Unapproved Therapeutic Goods (AUS-86) (Last Updated May 26, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Human Research Ethics Application (HREA) Login Page (AUS-9) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Webpage) Human Research Ethics Application Form (AUS-46) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Webpage) Human Research Ethics Application Form Resources (AUS-19) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Webpage) Human Research Ethics Committees (AUS-20) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Webpage) Indemnity & Compensation Guidelines (AUS-39) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Medicines Australia
(Webpage) Information & Notices about TGA Fees & Payments (AUS-25) (Last Updated August 27, 2022)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) (AUS-67) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
World Health Organization
(Webpage) International Scientific Guidelines Adopted in Australia (AUS-74) (Current as of November 25, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Leadership and Business Divisions (AUS-28) (Last Updated November 10, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Login to TGA Business Services (AUS-36) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Make an Online Payment (AUS-16) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) National Certification Scheme for the Ethics Review of Multi-centre Research (AUS-21) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Webpage) National Clinical Trials Governance Framework (AUS-63) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care
(Webpage) Payment Options (AUS-66) (Last Updated July 18, 2024)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Pre-Submission Meeting Forms (AUS-17) (Last Updated March 2, 2018)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Pre-Submission Meetings with TGA (AUS-92) (Last Updated December 2, 2020)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Principles, Regulations and Governance of Clinical Trials (AUS-40) (Last Updated September 26, 2025)
Australian Clinical Trials, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Register a Clinical Trial in Australia (AUS-15) (Last Updated November 7, 2023)
Australian Clinical Trials, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Report an Adverse Event or Safety Problem (AUS-51) (Last Updated April 17, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Research Ethics and Governance Information System (REGIS) (AUS-10) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
The Government of New South Wales, Australia and the Government of Australian Capital Territory, Australia
(Webpage) Research GEMS Login (AUS-55) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Government of South Australia
(Webpage) Researchers (AUS-64) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Australian Clinical Trials, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Review of the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) Scheme (AUS-88) (Last Updated September 1, 2024)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Roles and Responsibilities for Clinical Trial Safety Reporting of Significant Safety Issues and Urgent Safety Measures (AUS-53) (Last Updated January 8, 2024)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Submit Evaluation Information to us Electronically (AUS-94) (Last Updated July 10, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) TGA Business Services: Getting Started with the TGA (AUS-30) (Last Updated June 30, 2021)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) TGA Online - Adverse Event Reporting (AUS-7) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Therapeutic Goods Orders (AUS-93) (Last Updated October 1, 2024)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) What We Regulate (AUS-31) (Current as of September 30, 2025)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Webpage) Who Can Participate in a Clinical Trial (AUS-71) (Last Updated January 29, 2024)
Australian Clinical Trials, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
Forms
(Form) Blue Card Adverse Reaction Reporting Form (AUS-3) (June 2018)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Form) CIOMS Form I (AUS-4) (Data Unavailable)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(Form) Clinical Trial Significant Safety Issue/Urgent Safety Measure Safety Reporting Form (SSI/USM) (AUS-37) (June 2023)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Form) CTA Clinical Trial Completion Advice (AUS-58) (Date Unavailable)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Form) Supply of Unapproved Therapeutic Goods under the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) Scheme - Part 1: The CTA Application (AUS-56) (November 2020)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
(Form) Supply of Unapproved Therapeutic Goods under the Clinical Trial Approval (CTA) Scheme - Part 2: Notification of the Conduct of a Trial under the CTA Scheme (AUS-57) (November 2020)
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Bangladesh
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
Unspecified
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
No
Clinical trial registration required
Yes
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
No
Age of minors
Under 18
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
In Bangladesh, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) and the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC) are involved in clinical trial oversight and coordination.

Directorate General of Drug Administration

As per the DrugsCosAct and the BGD-GCP, the DGDA is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial oversight and inspections in Bangladesh. According to the DrugsCosAct, the DGDA also licenses establishments involved with manufacturing, selling, importing, and exporting of drugs; implements pharmacovigilance activities; and inspects and supervises establishments that manufacture and sell drugs.

The BGD-GCP indicates that the DGDA provides the legal framework for clinical trials. The DGDA’s responsibilities include approval and inspection of clinical trial facilities, study protocol approval, and authorizing the import of clinical trial investigational products, with the goal of protecting the safety and rights of trial participants and ensuring that trials are adequately designed to meet scientifically sound objectives. In addition, the DGDA approves and oversees ethics committee (EC) activities (Note: ECs are also referred to as independent ethics committees (IECs)/institutional review boards (IRBs) in Bangladesh).

According to BGD-8, the DGDA also ensures the quality, safety, efficacy, and usefulness of drugs and medicines which are produced, imported, and marketed in Bangladesh, as well as exported overseas. This includes issuing and renewing licenses for drug manufacturing. Additionally, the DGDA engages in pharmacovigilance activities. See BGD-9 for the DGDA organogram.

Bangladesh Medical Research Council

The G-BMRC indicates that the BMRC, established by the BMRC-Res, is an autonomous body that operates under the MOHFW. The BMRC’s objectives are to identify problems and issues relating to medical and health sciences and to determine priority areas in research based on healthcare needs, goals, policies, and objectives. The BMRC also provides advice on all health research related matters to government departments and international agencies.

As per the G-BMRC and BGD-36, the BMRC organizes and promotes scientific research in various fields of medicine, public health, reproductive health, and nutrition with specific references to primary health care needs for the application and utilization of health research results. BGD-36 further indicates that the BMRC trains the health research workforce through workshops/training programs, and organizes and disseminates research information through publications, research seminars, workshops, and orientation courses. Additionally, the BMRC initiates, assists, promotes, and coordinates scientific research in the field of health in medical institutions and helps such institutions in developing expertise and facilities for health research.

As stated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, any health research to be conducted in Bangladesh must be registered with the BMRC. In addition to obtaining the DGDA’s permission to conduct research in Bangladesh, an applicant must obtain ethics approval from the BMRC’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC). For more information on the NREC, see the Ethics Committee section.

Other Considerations

Please note: Bangladesh is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (BGD-2), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see BGD-4.

Contact Information

Directorate General of Drug Administration

According to BGD-13 and BGD-28, the DGDA’s contact information is as follows:

Directorate General of Drug Administration
Aushad Bhavan
Mohakhali Bazar Rd, Dhaka-1212, Bangladesh

Phone: +8802-9880803, +8802-9880864, +8802-9880897, +8802-9880924
Fax: +8802-9880854
Email: dgda.gov@gmail.com

Bangladesh Medical Research Council

As per BGD-30, the BMRC’s contact information is as follows:

Bangladesh Medical Research Council
BMRC Bhaban
Mohakhali, Dhaka-1212, Bangladesh

Phone: +8802-222299311, +8802-222298396
Fax: +880-2-222263820
Email: info@bmrcbd.org

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

As per the BGD-GCP, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) is responsible for reviewing, evaluating, and approving clinical trial applications for drugs in Bangladesh. According to the G-BMRC, Phase I-III clinical trials require DGDA clearance, while all phases require ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) approval.

The BGD-GCP and BGD-22 indicate that ethical clearance by an EC is a required element of a clinical trial application to the DGDA. Therefore, DGDA review and ethics review may not be conducted in parallel. (Note: According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) is registered with the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) as an official IRB.)

See the Scope of Review section for detailed information on ethical approval processes.

Clinical Trial Review Process

According to the BGD-GCP, the DGDA must ensure that clinical trial protocols are submitted in advance for review and in accordance with existing national regulations. During its review of clinical trial protocols and/or reports, the DGDA may propose revisions or request additional data on a clinical trial or terminate a trial. The DGDA also evaluates the adequacy of supervision of the trial by reviewing the monitor’s reports to the sponsor. The principal investigator (PI) or contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for submitting the clinical trial application. BGD-22 indicates that the protocol is then screened by the DGDA Clinical Trial Cell before it is sent to the Clinical Trial Advisory Committee.

As delineated in the DrugsCosAct, the DGDA may obtain a legal opinion or technical analysis/opinion on any matter from one (1) or more persons who are experts or have special knowledge/experience in the matter concerned or may invite them to attend meetings. The BGD-GCP states that the MOHFW’s Clinical Trial Advisory Committee, an expert committee comprised of medical experts of different specialties, supports the DGDA with evaluating/reviewing protocols. In the case of major or critical noncompliance, such as a faulty trial design, the Clinical Trial Advisory Committee will not recommend the protocol for approval. The DGDA’s Clinical Trial Cell will issue a notice to the PI, specifying the reasons for disapproval of the protocol as recommended by the Clinical Trial Advisory Committee/Clinical Trial Cell. See the BGD-GCP for more information on the Clinical Trial Advisory Committee.

Per the DrugsCosAct and the BGD-GCP, the DGDA may accept clinical trial information or approved data received from foreign drug regulatory authorities. Additionally, the DGDA may, subject to the approval of the government, approve fast track clinical trials in case of new drugs for emergency health care or epidemic diseases, or during a public health emergency.

The BGD-GCP indicates that protocol amendments and time extensions should be submitted to the DGDA with justification. As stated in BGD-22, any amendment, addendum, site change, or modification of the clinical trial must be approved by the DGDA. If new investigators are added after initiation of the study, their curriculum vitaes (CVs) must be submitted to the DGDA. See the Timeline of Review section and BGD-22 for detailed information on protocol approval, amendment, and fast track timelines.

As per the BGD-GCP, the DGDA carries out on-site inspections of the clinical trial site. Such inspections may be carried out routinely, randomly, and/or for specific reasons, and should consist of a comparison of the procedures and practices of the investigator with those set out in the protocol and reports submitted to the DGDA by the investigator or the sponsor. The DGDA may also conduct risk-based good clinical practice (GCP) inspections. The inspection should determine whether the investigator has custody of the required records or, if not, who has assumed this responsibility. The data archives should be tested for ease of retrieval. Inspections may include data audit. The DGDA should have easy access to all patient files and raw data used for and generated during the trial. As stated in the G-CTInspect, the aims of the clinical trial inspection program are to verify: GCP compliance to protect the rights, safety, and well-being of trial participants; the credibility and integrity of clinical trial data generated; and compliance with applicable regulatory provisions. For more information, see the G-CTInspect.

The DrugsCosAct and the BGD-GCP indicate that if there is any risk to the participants during the clinical trial, the DGDA Director General may temporarily or permanently stop the trial.

See BGD-14 for a list of clinical trial guidelines and forms. Also see the G-BGD-Vaccine and the G-SCCPs for guidelines on human vaccine registration and stem cell/cell based product approval, respectively.

(See the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for detailed submission requirements and review processes.)

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Directorate General of Drug Administration

As per the BGD-GCP, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) will charge fees for clinical trial protocol applications and pay reasonable per diem to the members of the Clinical Trial Advisory Committee for attending evaluation meetings. Specific fee amounts are not available at this time.

Payment Instructions

No information is available regarding payment instructions.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

According to the BGD-GCP and BGD-22, ethical clearance by an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) is a required element of a clinical trial application to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA). (Note: The Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) is registered with the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) as an official IRB.)

As delineated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the applicant must obtain ethics approval from the NREC, which reviews all clinical trials of both non-registered medicinal substances in Bangladesh and new indications of already registered medicinal substances. The NREC also sets standards, advises the MOHFW and other departments on the management of research ethics for Bangladesh, and arbitrates on matters of ethics.

However, per BGD-7, the DGDA requires review and approval by an institution’s/organization’s EC for all clinical trials involving humans. Clinical trials that obtain ethical approval from certain well-established ECs do not require NREC approval.

The IRB-Manual indicates that there are several ECs that review and issue ethical clearance for an institution’s/organization’s students or faculty regarding their research. For more information, see the Scope of Review section.

Ethics Committee Composition

Institutional Ethics Committee

As stated in the BGD-GCP, the EC should consist of a reasonable number of members, who collectively have the qualifications and experience to review and evaluate the science, medical aspects, and ethics of the proposed trial. It is recommended that the EC include at least five (5) members, at least one (1) member whose primary area of interest is in a nonscientific area, and at least one (1) member who is independent of the institutional/trial site.

The IRB-Manual further specifies that there must be adequate experience, knowledge, and variety among the members to make an educated judgment. In addition, the EC:

Will have a chairman appointed to it
Must include men and women
Should be interdisciplinary and cross-sectoral
Should include both scientific and non-scientific specialists, such as a lawyer, a religious expert, and laypeople
Must have at least one (1) member (if it is a five (5)-member committee) who is not linked with the institution. For bigger committees, at least 40% of the members should be external to the institute/organization
See the BGD-GCP and the IRB-Manual for additional details on EC composition requirements.

National Research Ethics Committee

According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the NREC was formed by the BMRC and consists of nine (9) to 13 members. BGD-16 indicates that NREC membership includes a chairman and member secretary. A lawyer, female representative, religious leader, and research methodologist/biostatistician are obligatory members. All relevant new guidelines should be brought to the attention of the members. No information is currently available regarding requirements surrounding NREC renewal or expiration of tenure.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

Institutional Ethics Committee

Per the BGD-GCP, the EC must follow international guidelines on ethical issues and the safety of human participants exposed to clinical trials, including the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BGD-29) and the Declaration of Helsinki (BGD-33).

The BGD-GCP indicates that the list of EC members and their qualifications should be maintained. Additionally, the EC should perform its functions according to written operating procedures, maintain written records of its activities and minutes of its meetings, and comply with good clinical practice (GCP) and the applicable regulatory requirement(s). The EC must be independent of the institution/contract research organization (CRO), and all activities must be transparent.

Per the BGD-GCP, only EC members who are independent of the investigator and the sponsor of the trial should vote/provide opinion on a trial-related matter. An EC should make decisions at announced meetings at which at least a quorum, as stipulated in its written operating procedures, is present. The IRB-Manual specifies that quorum is defined as the presence of a majority of members at a meeting. EC members must not vote on their own projects, but all other EC members are eligible to vote. The presence of more than half of the EC members is required to vote on a proposal, and a non-scientist must be present as well.

The BGD-GCP further states that only members who participate in the EC review and discussion should vote/provide their opinion and/or advice. Every member should sign a declaration of conflict of interest. The investigator may provide information on any aspects of the trial, but should not participate in the deliberations or the vote/opinion of the EC. An EC may also invite nonmembers with expertise in special areas for assistance.

As required in the BGD-GCP, the EC should establish and follow written procedures, which should include:

Determining its composition (names and qualifications of the members) and the authority under which it is established
Scheduling, notifying its members of, and conducting its meetings
Conducting an initial and continuing review of trials
Determining the frequency of continuing review, as appropriate
Providing, according to the applicable regulatory requirements, expedited review and approval/favorable opinion of minor change(s) in ongoing trials that have the approval/favorable opinion of the EC
Specifying that no participant should be admitted to a trial before the EC issues its written approval/favorable opinion of the trial
Specifying that no deviations from, or changes of, the protocol should be initiated without prior written EC approval/favorable opinion of an appropriate amendment, except when necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to the participants or when the change(s) involves only logistical or administrative aspects of the trial (e.g., change of monitor(s), telephone number(s))
In addition, the BGD-GCP indicate that the EC should retain all relevant records (e.g., written procedures, membership lists, lists of occupations/affiliations of members, submitted documents, minutes of meetings, and correspondence) for at least three (3) years after completion of the trial and make them available upon request from the DGDA. The EC may also be asked by investigators, sponsors, or regulatory authorities to provide its written procedures and membership lists.

See the BGD-GCP and the IRB-Manual for additional EC terms of reference and review procedure requirements.

National Research Ethics Committee

BGD-16 indicates that NREC members should be encouraged to attend national and international training programs in research ethics for maintaining quality in ethical review and to be aware of the latest developments in this area.

According to BGD-16, the NREC will conduct a meeting every two (2) months, but the frequency of meetings may increase depending on the number of applications. The agenda should incorporate sufficient time for discussion of the applications. The chairperson will conduct all NREC meetings. In the absence of the chairperson, NREC members will elect a chairperson who will conduct the meeting. The member secretary is responsible for organizing the meetings, maintaining the records, and relevant communication. The notice of a meeting should be issued at least seven (7) days before the meeting.

As per BGD-16, minutes of the previous meeting should be maintained. Proceedings of the meetings should be confidential and maintained in a standard format and should be prepared within three (3) working days after the meeting. Additionally, the NREC should have the following documentation, which should be archived:

Copy of all study protocols with enclosed documents, progress reports, and serious adverse events (SAEs)
Minutes of all meetings
Copy of all existing relevant national and international guidelines on research ethics and laws along with amendments
Copy of all correspondence with members, researchers, and other regulatory bodies
Final report of the approved projects
Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

As per the BGD-GCP, ethics committees (ECs) (referred to as independent ethics committees (IECs)/institutional review boards (IRBs) in Bangladesh) are responsible for ensuring the protection of the rights, safety, and well-being of human participants involved in a clinical trial. It is also an EC’s responsibility to provide public assurance of that protection, by, among other things, reviewing and approving/providing a favorable opinion on the trial protocol, as well as the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, and the methods and material to be used in obtaining and documenting informed consent of the trial participants. The EC also provides continuing review of the trial protocol and amendments, and of the methods and material to be used.

The BGD-GCP further indicates that special attention should be paid to trials that may include vulnerable participants. An EC should follow the rules, regulations, and ethical guidelines of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA).

According to the G-BMRC, research requires ethical approval as a part of good research governance to:

Safeguard the dignity, rights, safety, and well-being of all potential research participants
Protect the rights of a researcher to carry out legitimate investigation, as well as the reputation of the institution
Minimize potential for claims of negligence made against the researchers, the institution concerned, and any collaborating individual or organization
Require evidence of ethical approval in refereed journals
Influence the research design with ethical consideration
Avoid potential problems later by ensuring that the main ethical issues are addressed before the research starts
As per the G-BMRC, strict guidelines on human genetics research must be followed in order to control and carefully use and disseminate information generated, such that it does not lead to misuse or commercial acquisition. Research protocols should follow established procedures for review and informed consent. The G-BMRC does not specify any particular guidelines or procedures.

The G-BMRC further states that a research proposal involving gene therapy must be evaluated based on medical, scientific, ethical, and safety aspects. The proposal must be first approved by the concerned institutional biosafety committee before submittal to the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC). See the G-BMRC for more specific guidelines involving human genetic and genomic research, including stem cell research.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

The BGD-GCP and BGD-22 state that ethical clearance by an EC is a required element of a clinical trial application to the DGDA. Therefore, DGDA review and ethics review may not be conducted in parallel. (Note: According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the BMRC’s NREC is registered with the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) as an official IRB.)

As delineated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the applicant must obtain ethics approval from the NREC.

However, per BGD-7, the DGDA requires review and approval by an institution’s/organization’s EC for all clinical trials involving humans. Clinical trials that obtain ethical approval from certain well-established ECs do not require NREC approval.

Institutional Ethics Committee

The IRB-Manual states that simple interventional studies such as health educational interventions, psychological interventions, community interventions, treatment regimens using DGDA approved drugs, and students’ theses/dissertations on small-scale clinical trials can be approved by institutional ECs. There are several ECs that review and issue ethical clearance for the institution’s/organization’s students or faculty regarding their research. An institution’s/organization's EC is only allowed to examine its own research protocols. However, if an institution/organization has no EC, it may obtain ethical approval of its protocols from a nearby EC.

Per the BGD-GCP, the EC should consider the qualifications of the investigator for the proposed trial, as documented by a current curriculum vitae (CV) and/or by any other relevant documentation the EC requests.

The BGD-GCP further states that the EC should review a proposed clinical trial within a reasonable time and document its views in writing, clearly identifying the trial, the documents reviewed, and the dates for the following: approval/favorable opinion; modifications required prior to its approval/favorable opinion; disapproval/negative opinion; and termination/suspension of any prior approval/favorable opinion. Additionally, the EC should conduct a continuing review of each ongoing trial at intervals appropriate to the degree of risk to human participants, but at least once a year.

As indicated in the BGD-GCP, any deviations from, or changes of, the protocol to eliminate immediate hazards to the trial participants, or changes increasing the risk to participants and/or affecting significantly the conduct of the trial, should be promptly reported by the investigator to the EC. Furthermore, the investigator should not implement a deviation from, or a change of, the protocol without prior EC approval/favorable opinion, except where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to trial participants, or when the change(s) involves only logistical or administrative aspects of the trial. As soon as possible, the implemented deviation or change, the reasons for it, and, if appropriate, the proposed protocol amendment(s) should be submitted to the EC for review and approval/favorable opinion; to the sponsor for agreement; and, if required, to the DGDA.

According to the BGD-GCP, if the EC terminates or suspends its approval/favorable opinion of a trial, the investigator should inform the institution where applicable and the investigator/institution should promptly notify the sponsor and provide the sponsor with a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension.

National Research Ethics Committee

According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the NREC reviews all clinical trials of both non-registered medicinal substances in Bangladesh and new indications of already registered medicinal substances. Research involving issues of religious or social sensitivity must be approved by the NREC. International collaborative research involving the Bangladeshi population must also receive ethical approval from the NREC, in addition to the government’s administrative approval.

The IRB-Manual further notes that all clinical trials on new drugs or molecules or devices, including bioequivalence and biosimilar studies, should be approved by the NREC. Additionally, only the NREC has the authority to examine a protocol from any institution, whether collaborative or not. As delineated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, scientific validity should be approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee before submission of a research project to the NREC. As per BGD-16, if a research proposal is not approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee, then it should be approved by the Scientific Review Committee of the BMRC before submission to the NREC. The NREC gives final ethical approval to research proposals, while the Scientific Review Committee analyzes whether the research proposal is of good scientific quality and value. The Scientific Review Committee also reviews the validity and feasibility of the protocol and cited relevant scientific literature (if any) of the proposed research, as well as ethical issues by peer review process. No additional information is available regarding the Scientific Review Committee’s role in review of ethical issues.

BGD-16 further indicates that all decisions will be communicated to the principal investigator (PI) in writing.

As delineated in BGD-16, expedited review may be granted when the research proposal is approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee as methodologically sound without any intervention and risk of distress or injury, physical or psychological, to the participants. The expedited proposal, along with justification, is presented to the NREC at its next meeting.

According to BGD-16, research proposals from university, medical college, or institution undergraduate students that are submitted with a recommendation from the head of the institution or institutional EC approval may be given an exemption from peer review. The exemption may be given if there is no intervention and risk of distress or injury, physical or psychological, to the participants. The NREC Chairman may give ethical approval of the proposal on the condition that the proposal must be submitted in the next NREC meeting.

The G-BMRC states that in the case of protocol deviation, approval from the NREC must be obtained and the licensing authority must be notified.

The G-BMRC and BGD-16 also indicate that the NREC conducts post-approval monitoring of clinical trials.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Institutional Ethics Committee

Per the BGD-GCP, ethics committees (ECs) (referred to as independent ethics committees (IECs)/institutional review boards (IRBs) in Bangladesh) may charge fees for their services, such as ethical evaluations of protocols and ethical/good clinical practice (GCP) compliance inspections (as required). Fees are fixed by the EC and endorsed by the organization. An annual financial audit system should be in place, and transparency of income and expenditure should be maintained.

Payment Instructions

No information is currently available regarding payment instruction standards for institutional ECs.

National Research Ethics Committee

According to BGD-15 and BGD-16, there is a review and processing fee for Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC) ethical approval via its National Research Ethics Committee (NREC). The fee is based on 2% of the total cost of the approved research project, not exceeding 500,000 Bangladeshi Taka. For clinical trials or drug research, the principal investigator (PI) must pay 50,000 Bangladeshi Taka to the BMRC with the initial submission. However, undergraduate students are required to pay 2,000 Bangladeshi Taka at the time of submission. For amendments and renewals, 50% of the first approval fee will be charged.

No information is currently available regarding BMRC fees for Scientific Review Committee approval.

Payment Instructions

BGD-15 and BGD-16 indicate that the PI must pay the total applicable fee to the BMRC following receipt of ethical approval. The fee is paid by an Account Payee Cheque made out to the “Bangladesh Medical Research Council” at the time the approval letter is received.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

The BGD-GCP states that all institutional ethics committees (ECs) must be registered with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) (Note: ECs are referred to as independent ethics committees (IECs)/institutional review boards (IRBs) in Bangladesh).

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

According to the BGD-GCP, an application for registration of the EC must be submitted to the DGDA’s National Advisory Committee on Human Ethics for IRB/IEC Evaluation. The committee will assess the curriculum vitae (CV), experience, and competence of the EC’s members. Additionally, the committee will evaluate the facilities and subsequently make recommendations to the Director General of the DGDA.

Per the BGD-GCP, committee members are required to annually sign a declaration of conflict of interest. If any committee members are affiliated with any EC, they must abstain from participating in access, voting, or inspection activities related to that particular EC. The committee has the authority to co-opt one (1) or more members if necessary. The DGDA also has the authority to cancel or suspend an EC’s approval if it fails to adhere to the BGD-GCP.

The BGD-GCP indicates that the DGDA will approve and oversee the activities of the EC, with renewal required every 2 (two) years. Additionally, the DGDA will charge fees for the EC registration application and pay reasonable per diem to the members of the National Advisory Committee for attending evaluation meetings.

See Annexure 5 of the BGD-GCP and BGD-17 for a list of documents required for EC registration approval.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

As per the BGD-GCP, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) is responsible for reviewing, evaluating, and approving clinical trial applications for drugs in Bangladesh. The BGD-GCP and BGD-22 indicate that ethical clearance by an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) is a required element of a clinical trial application to the DGDA. Therefore, DGDA review and ethics review may not be conducted in parallel. (Note: According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) is registered with the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) as an official IRB.)

In addition, as delineated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, any health research to be conducted in Bangladesh must be registered with the BMRC, and scientific validity should be approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee before submission of a research project to the BMRC’s NREC. An applicant must obtain ethics approval from the NREC.

However, per BGD-7, the DGDA requires review and approval by an institution’s/organization’s EC for all clinical trials involving humans. Clinical trials that obtain ethical approval from certain well-established ECs do not require NREC approval.

Regulatory Submission

As per the BGD-GCP, the principal investigator (PI) or contract research organization (CRO) must submit the application for permission to conduct a clinical trial to the DGDA.

As per BGD-22, the application to conduct a clinical trial must be submitted on the organization’s official letterhead to:

The Director General
Directorate General of Drug Administration
Mohakhali, Dhaka-1212, Bangladesh

There is no specified language requirement for all the documents to be submitted to the DGDA.

See Annexure-4 of BGD-22 for the clinical protocol amendment application format.

Ethics Review Submission

BGD-16 indicates that all research projects seeking ethical approval should be submitted to the NREC in the prescribed application form (see Annexure A of BGD-15 or BGD-16). All relevant documents should be enclosed with the application form. The proposal, formal application, and relevant documents must be duly signed by the PI and co-investigators/collaborators, and then should be forwarded to the NREC members/secretary.

According to BGD-15 and BGD-16, an application for NREC approval of a clinical trial must be submitted to:

Bangladesh Medical Research Council
Mohakhali, Dhaka-1212, Bangladesh

BGD-15 and BGD-16 further state that four (4) copies of all documents must be submitted to the BMRC. A soft copy on a CD must also be submitted, and all documents should be submitted in an A-4 size data bank file/folder.

There is no specified language requirement for all the documents to be submitted to the BMRC. However, BGD-15 and BGD-16 indicate that the informed consent form, as well as the questionnaire or interview schedule, must be provided in both Bengali and English.

No information is currently available regarding general institutional EC submission process standards or Scientific Review Committee submission process requirements. Each institutional EC has its own required submission procedures, which can differ significantly regarding the application format and number of copies. See BGD-10 and BGD-11 for an example of an institutional EC’s guidelines for students and teachers, respectively.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

As per BGD-22, the following documentation must be submitted to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) to conduct a clinical trial:

Detailed description of Clinical Research Protocol Checklist (see BGD-22)
Ethical clearance for conducting the clinical trial from the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh)
Investigator’s Brochure (IB)
Informed consent form (ICF)
Signed agreements between the sponsor, contract research organization (CRO), trial center, and/or principal investigator (Pl)
Curriculum vitae(s) (CV(s)) of PI and associates
Good manufacturing practice (GMP) certificate of investigational product (IP)
Certificate of Analysis of IP
Details on funding of the trials
Case record form (CRF)
Standard operating procedures (SOPs) of different activities
Good clinical practice (GCP) training certificate of PI and team members
See Annexure-4 of BGD-22 for the clinical protocol amendment application format.

Ethics Committee Requirements

Institutional Ethics Committee

Per the BGD-GCP, the EC should review the following documents:

Trial protocol(s)/amendment(s)
Written ICF(s) and consent form updates that the investigator proposes for use in the trial
Participant recruitment procedures and written information to be provided to participants
IB
Available safety information
Information about payments and compensation available to participants
The investigator's current CV and/or other documentation evidencing qualifications, and any other documents that the EC may need to fulfill its responsibilities
For the BMRC’s guidance for institutional ECs regarding submission format, see Annexure C of the IRB-Manual.

National Research Ethics Committee

BGD-15 and BGD-16 indicate that the following documents must be submitted to the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC) for ethical approval:

PI cover letter to Director for ethical clearance
Completed Ethical Clearance Application Form (Annexure A of BGD-15 and BGD-16)
Signature of PI(s) and co-investigator(s) with detailed addresses (Annexure A of BGD-15 and BGD-16)
Abstract for National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) (Annexure B of BGD-15 and BGD-16)
BMRC format for submission of a research proposal for ethical approval (Annexure C of BGD-15 and BGD-16)
Informed consent form (both Bengali and English) from participant(s) or legal representative/guardian (Annexure D of BGD-15 and BGD-16)
Questionnaire or interview schedule (both Bengali and English)
Procedure for maintaining confidentiality
Budget (Annexure E of BGD-15 and BGD-16)
Copy of approval from valid scientific review committee (if any)
Four (4) copies of all documents and a soft copy in CD format to be submitted to the BMRC (all documents should be submitted in an A-4 size data bank file/folder)
Review and processing fee (RPF) for ethical approval
No information is currently available regarding Scientific Review Committee submission content requirements.

Clinical Protocol

According to the BGD-GCP, BGD-22, and BGD-24, the clinical research protocol should include the following information (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

General information (name and address of the sponsor and monitor, etc.)
Background information
Trial objectives and purpose
Trial design
Selection and withdrawal of participants
Treatment of participants
Assessment of efficacy
Assessment of safety
Procedures for evaluating an adverse event
Statistics
Direct access to source data/documents
Quality control and quality assurance
Ethical considerations
Data handling and record keeping
Financing and insurance
Publication policy
Supplements
The BGD-GCP, BGD-22, and BGD-24 further state that since the protocol and the clinical trial/study report are closely related, further relevant information can be found in the International Council for Harmonisation’s (ICH) Guideline for Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (BGD-31). See the BGD-GCP, BGD-31, BGD-22, and BGD-24 for more detailed requirements.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

The BGD-GCP and BGD-22 indicate that ethical clearance by an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) is a required element of a clinical trial application to the Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA). Therefore, DGDA review and ethics review may not be conducted in parallel. (Note: According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) is registered with the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) as an official IRB.)

In addition, as delineated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, scientific validity should be approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee before submission of a research project to the NREC.

Regulatory Authority Approval

The BGD-GCP and BGD-22 state that the clinical trial protocol should be approved by the DGDA within 60 working days. However, the BGD-GCP further specifies that the 60 working day timeline only applies if there are no observations.

BGD-22 indicates that DGDA Clinical Trial Cell members will screen protocol submissions within five (5) days. If a deficiency is found, the DGDA Clinical Trial Cell will issue a deficiency letter to the applicant within seven (7) days. After the Clinical Trial Advisory Committee decides to disapprove the protocol or recommend it for approval, the disapproval letter or final approval, respectively, will be issued within seven (7) days.

Per the BGD-GCP and BGD-22, for fast-track clinical trial protocols, approval should be granted within 15 working days, and for clinical trial protocol amendments, approval should be obtained within 30 working days. For detailed information on these timelines, see BGD-22 for the clinical trial approval, amendment, and fast track flowcharts.

Ethics Committee Approval

The BGD-GCP states that an EC should review a proposed clinical trial within a reasonable time.

As delineated in BGD-16, NREC expedited review may be granted when the research proposal is approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee as methodologically sound without any intervention and risk of distress or injury, physical or psychological, to the participants. The expedited proposal, along with justification for expedition, is presented to the NREC at its next meeting.

According to BGD-16, research proposals submitted to the NREC from university, medical college, or institution undergraduate students with a recommendation from the head of the institution or institutional EC approval may be given an exemption from peer review. The exemption may be given if there is no intervention and risk of distress or injury, physical or psychological, to the participants. The NREC Chairman may give ethical approval of the proposal on the condition that the proposal must be submitted in the next NREC meeting.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

The G-BGD-IP states that the sponsor may not start a clinical trial until authorization has been granted for the trial; all conditions of the authorization have been met; an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) favorable opinion has been granted; and each trial site has been approved. (Note: According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) is registered with the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) as an official IRB.)

As per the BGD-GCP, the principal investigator (PI) or contract research organization (CRO) must submit an application to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) for permission to conduct a clinical trial in Bangladesh.

Clinical trials must be conducted in accordance with the good clinical practice (GCP) requirements in the BGD-GCP, which was derived from the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BGD-29) and other international guidance material.

As delineated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, in addition to obtaining the DGDA’s permission to conduct research in Bangladesh, an applicant must obtain ethics approval from the NREC. Furthermore, scientific validity should be approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee before submission of a research project to the NREC. However, per BGD-7, the DGDA requires review and approval by an institution’s/organization’s EC for all clinical trials involving humans. Clinical trials that obtain ethical approval from certain well-established ECs do not require NREC approval.

Clinical Trial Agreement

The BGD-GCP states that before the commencement of the clinical trial, an agreement must be signed by the involved parties. This may include an agreement between the investigator/institution, sponsor, and CRO; the sponsor and CRO; and/or the investigator/institution and relevant authority(ies) (where required).

The BGD-GCP further specifies that the sponsor should obtain the investigator's/institution's agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with GCP, the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and given approval/favorable opinion by the EC
Comply with procedures for data recording/reporting
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain the trial-related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution these documents are no longer needed
As per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement. In addition, the financial aspects of the trial should be documented in an agreement between the sponsor and the investigator/institution. The sponsor should also ensure that it is specified in the protocol or other written agreement that the investigator(s)/institution(s) provide direct access to source data/documents for trial-related monitoring, audits, EC review, and regulatory inspection.

Clinical Trial Registration

The G-BMRC and BGD-16 indicate that any health research to be conducted in Bangladesh must be registered with the BMRC. The BMRC has developed a form for the registration of research studies and is in the process of developing an electronic submission system for registration. Clinical trials should be registered in the BMRC’s Clinical Trial Registry. According to the G-BMRC, the Clinical Trial Registry will be available through the BMRC website when it is completed. No additional information is available regarding the BMRC's Clinical Trial Registry or its timeline for implementation. Contact the BMRC for more information regarding the registration process. See the Regulatory Authority section for general BMRC contact information.

See BGD-19 for DGDA lists of approved, amended, extended, suspended, and canceled clinical trial protocols in Bangladesh, along with other clinical trial resources.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

As per the BGD-GCP, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Bangladesh’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical investigation participant who is administered an investigational product (IP) that does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – All noxious and unintended responses to a medicinal product related to any dose
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)/Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life-threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or prolonged existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction – An adverse reaction, the nature or severity of which is not consistent with the applicable product information (e.g., Investigator’s Brochure (IB) for an unapproved IP)
Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

The BGD-GCP states that the principal investigator (PI) should report all detected SAEs within two (2) working days to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA), the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh), the data and safety monitoring board (DSMB), and the sponsor. The immediate reports should be followed within seven (7) days by detailed, written reports. The immediate and follow-up reports should identify participants by unique code numbers assigned to the participants rather than by the participants’ names, personal identification numbers, and/or addresses. Additionally, the investigator must report unexpected SADRs to the DGDA and the EC within seven (7) working days. The PI (or the sponsor) should submit to the regulatory authority(ies) all safety updates, as required by applicable regulatory requirement(s).

As per the BGD-GCP, AEs and/or laboratory abnormalities identified in the protocol as critical to safety evaluations should be reported to the sponsor according to the reporting requirements and within the time periods specified by the sponsor in the protocol. For reported deaths, the investigator should supply the sponsor and the EC with any additional requested information (e.g., autopsy reports and terminal medical reports).

However, the G-BMRC delineates that the investigator should report unexpected AEs/ADRs and all SAEs to the sponsor within 24 hours and to the EC that approved the study protocol within seven (7) days. In the event of death, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) should also be informed within 24 hours. The G-BMRC and BGD-16 state that the PI should report SAEs and AEs to the NREC.

In addition, BGD-24 states that when an AE is identified, the PI or their designee must document the AE in the case report form (CRF) and the appropriate toxicity grade from the study-assigned toxicity grading scale. An initial report of the SAE must be transmitted through email to the DGDA, as well as to the sponsor and EC, within 24 hours, and AEs should be communicated within 72 hours. The PI must review all AEs, assessing causality and the required course of action in accordance with the protocol and regulations.

Sponsor Responsibilities

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should promptly notify all concerned investigator(s)/institution(s) and the regulatory authority(ies) of findings that could affect adversely the safety of participants, impact the conduct of the trial, or alter the EC’s approval/favorable opinion to continue the trial. The sponsor should expedite the reporting to all concerned investigator(s)/institutions(s), the EC(s) (where required), and the regulatory authority(ies) of all ADRs that are both serious and unexpected. An initial report of the SAE must be transmitted within 15 calendar days and should be submitted within 30 calendar days. The sponsor (or the PI) should submit to the regulatory authority(ies) all safety updates, as required by applicable regulatory requirement(s).

The G-BMRC indicates that any unexpected SAE that occurs during a clinical trial should be communicated by the sponsor promptly within 14 calendar days to the licensing authority and to the investigator(s) of other trial sites participating in the study. This is so the regulatory authority can immediately stop the clinical trials of unapproved drugs or withdraw from market approved drugs based on a report of Phase IV studies. All other SADRs that are not fatal, or life threatening must be filed as soon as possible but not later than 14 calendar days. At the end of the trial, all AEs, whether related to the trial or not, must be listed, evaluated, and discussed in detail in the final report.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

BGD-24 states that the PI or their designee should report to the DGDA through the Adverse Event Reporting Form During Clinical Trial Study, which is available in BGD-24. An initial report of any SAE must be transmitted through email to the DGDA, as well as to the sponsor and EC, within 24 hours, and AEs should be communicated within 72 hours. The PI must also send a casualty assessment report completed by the EC to the DGDA.

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor’s expedited reports regarding ADRs that are both serious and unexpected should comply with the applicable regulatory requirement(s) and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (BGD-32).

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

As per the BGD-GCP, the investigator should submit written summaries of the trial status every six (6) months to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) and the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh), or more frequently, if requested by the DGDA and the EC. The investigator should promptly provide written reports to the sponsor, the EC, and the institution (where applicable) on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to participants.

BGD-16 indicates that reports should be submitted periodically at intervals prescribed by the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) for review.

Final Report

The BGD-GCP delineates that upon completion of the trial, the investigator, where applicable, should inform the institution. The investigator/institution should provide the EC with a summary of the trial’s outcome, and the DGDA with any required reports. Whether the trial is completed or prematurely terminated, the sponsor should ensure that the clinical trial reports are prepared and provided to the regulatory authority(ies).

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor may refer to the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (BGD-31) for further guidance.

As per BGD-16, a report should be submitted to the NREC at the end of the study.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
As defined in the BGD-GCP, the sponsor is an individual, company, institution, or organization which takes responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a clinical trial. The sponsor is also responsible for the ongoing safety evaluation of the investigational product(s) (IP(s)). According to the G-BMRC, research may be undertaken with assistance from international organizations as sponsors.

The BGD-GCP states that prior to initiating a trial, the sponsor should define, establish, and allocate all trial-related duties and functions. The sponsor may transfer any or all of the sponsor’s trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO), but the ultimate responsibility for the quality and integrity of the trial data always resides with the sponsor. The CRO should implement quality assurance and quality control. The CRO must obtain approval from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) to conduct a clinical trial, with the renewal of approval required every two (2) years. Any trial-related duties and functions that are transferred to and assumed by a CRO should be specified in writing, and any trial-related duties and functions not specifically transferred to and assumed by a CRO are retained by the sponsor.

See BGD-24 for the Requirements for CRO/Clinical Trial Centre form.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

As per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s)/institution(s) for a clinical trial in Bangladesh. Each investigator should be qualified by training (including approved good clinical practice (GCP) training) and experience and have adequate resources to properly conduct the trial for which the investigator is selected. The investigator(s) should also meet all the qualifications specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s) and provide evidence of such qualifications through up-to-date curriculum vitae (CV) and/or other relevant documentation requested by the sponsor, the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh), and/or the Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA).

Additionally, the BGD-GCP indicates that the investigator should be thoroughly familiar with the appropriate use of the investigational product(s) (IP(s)), as described in the protocol, the current Investigator's Brochure (IB), the product information, and other information sources provided by the sponsor. The investigator should be aware of and comply with GCP and applicable regulatory requirements. In addition, the investigator should maintain a list of appropriately qualified persons to whom the investigator has delegated significant trial-related duties.

According to the BGD-GCP, if a coordinating committee and/or coordinating investigator(s) are to be utilized in multicenter trials, their organization and/or selection are the sponsor's responsibilities. Before entering an agreement with an investigator/institution to conduct a trial, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the protocol and an up-to-date IB and provide sufficient time for the investigator/institution to review the protocol and the information provided.

The BGD-GCP further states that the EC should consider the qualifications of the investigator for the proposed trial, as documented by a current CV and/or by any other relevant documentation the EC requests. In addition, the sponsor should designate appropriately qualified medical personnel who will be readily available to advise on trial-related medical questions or problems. If necessary, outside consultant(s) may be appointed for this purpose.

According to BGD-16, a change of investigators and/or place of study must be approved by the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC).

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

No information is currently available regarding foreign sponsor regulatory requirements.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

As per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should utilize appropriately qualified individuals to supervise the overall conduct of the trial, to handle the data, to verify the data, to conduct the statistical analyses, and to prepare the trial reports. The sponsor may consider establishing a data and safety monitoring board (DSMB) (also referred to as an independent data-monitoring committee (IDMC)) to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial. The DSMB should have written operating procedures and maintain written records of all its meetings.

However, according to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the formation of a DSMB is mandatory for conducting a clinical trial. Per BGD-16, at least two (2) members must be included from the NREC during the formation of the DSMB.

Per the IRB-Manual, the BMRC’s guidance for institutional ECs, the size of the DSMB is determined by the type of trial and the degree of expertise necessary. A DSMB must be made up of at least three (3) members, with an odd number allowing for a definitive decision in case a vote is required. DSMB members often include individuals with scientific knowledge of the disease/participant population under investigation, as well as practical expertise and skill in current clinical trial conduct and technique, and one (1) or more epidemiologist(s) and statistician(s). Items reviewed by the DSMB include:

Interim/cumulative data to look for evidence of adverse events related to the study
If applicable, interim/cumulative data for evidence of efficacy in accordance with pre-established statistical parameters
Data completeness, accuracy, and timeliness
Each trial site’s performance
Factors that could have an impact on the trial's outcome or jeopardize its data confidentiality, such as protocol violations, unmasking, etc.
Multicenter Studies

The BGD-GCP indicates that for multicenter trials, the sponsor should ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and, if required, by the regulatory authority(ies), and given approval/favorable opinion by the EC
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites. For investigators collecting additional data, supplemental CRFs should also be provided that are designed to capture the additional data
The responsibilities of coordinating investigator(s) and the other participating investigators are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards for the assessment of clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication between investigators is facilitated
The G-BMRC further states that in a meaningful multicenter trial, all study sites should be conducted in the same way and follow standardized procedures and evaluation criteria. Meetings should be arranged at the initial and intermediary stages of the trial to ensure consistent procedures at all centers. For recruitment, evaluation/monitoring of laboratory procedures, and conduct of trial, standardization of methods should be carried out. If necessary, the protocol should include monitoring of protocol adherence including measures to terminate the participation of some centers. For this purpose, a central monitoring committee could be set up including EC members. In addition, the specific role of coordinators and monitors should be defined, and centralized data management and analysis should be planned.

According to the G-BMRC, a drafting procedure for common final report and publication should be decided at the outset of the trial. No individual center should publish any data until appropriate authorities accept the combined report. It is advisable to establish communication between ECs reviewing multicenter studies in Bangladesh to discuss ethical concerns of the trial, preferably under the guidance of the NREC, which is particularly important if any EC does not grant approval for a study at a site for ethical reasons.

As per the BGD-GCP, efficient communication between sponsors and regulatory authorities is strongly encouraged during the planning stage of multiregional clinical trials (MRCTs). The aim is to secure acceptance of a global approach to study design that spans different regulatory regions. MRCTs should get approval from the national regulatory authority of the country where they could be conducted before starting. All sites participating in MRCTs must adhere to applicable quality, ethical, and regulatory standards. Specifically, MRCTs should be conducted in compliance with the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BGD-29) standards in all regions and sites, and sites should be made available for GCP inspections by regulatory authorities. Monitoring plans and other quality checks should be pre-specified and implemented to address potential risks to participant rights, safety, well-being, and the reliability of study results. Centralized and risk-based monitoring can be particularly useful for MRCTs to monitor and mitigate the impact of emerging regional differences, such as trial participant retention or adverse event reporting (per the BGD-29). A timely and accurate flow of information is crucial between the sponsor, the trial management team, and the participating sites. Additionally, the ICH’s General Principles for Planning and Design of Multi-Regional Clinical Trials (E17) (BGD-6) should be followed.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Insurance

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor and investigator/institution may be required to generate and retain an insurance statement to document that compensation to participant(s) for trial-related injury will be available.

The BGD-GCP states that if required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), the sponsor must provide insurance or must indemnify (legal and financial coverage) the investigator/institution against claims arising from the trial, except for claims that arise from malpractice and/or negligence.

According to the G-BMRC, sponsors are advised to obtain adequate insurance against risk to cover compensation.

Compensation

Injury or Death

According to the BGD-GCP, sponsor's policies and procedures should address the costs of treatment of trial participants in the event of trial-related injuries in accordance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s). In addition, when trial participants receive compensation, the method and manner of compensation should comply with applicable regulatory requirement(s).

As per the G-BMRC, it is the right of the participants included in a research study to have compensation from the investigator in case of injury and/or disability caused by participation in the study. Research participants who suffer physical injury as a result of their participation are entitled to such financial or other assistance as would compensate them equitably for any temporary or permanent impairment or disability. In the case of death, their dependents are entitled to compensation. Procedures and provisions for compensation should be mentioned in the research proposal and be reviewed by the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC). The NREC should give guidelines and/or directions for compensation. In addition, the informed consent form (ICF) should include details about compensation procedures and provisions.

Trial Participation

The G-BMRC states that participants may be paid for inconveniences and time spent. They should be reimbursed for expenses incurred in connection with their participation in the research and may also receive free medical services. However, the payments should not be so large or the medical services so extensive as to induce prospective participants to consent to participate in the research against their better judgment. All payments, reimbursements, and medical services to be provided to research participants should be mentioned in the research proposal and approved by an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh).

The BGD-GCP delineates that the EC should review both the amount and method of payment to participants to ensure that neither presents problems of coercion or undue influence on the trial participants. Payments to a participant should be prorated and not wholly contingent on the completion of the trial by the participant.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance and quality control systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, documented (recorded), and reported in compliance with the protocol, good clinical practice (GCP), and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for securing agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial-related sites, source data/documents, and reports for monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. Quality control should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been processed correctly.

Monitoring Requirements

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should ensure that the trials are adequately monitored, and determine the appropriate extent and nature of monitoring. The determination of the extent and nature of monitoring should be based on considerations such as the objective, purpose, design, complexity, blinding, size, and endpoints of the trial. Monitors, which are appointed by the sponsor, should be appropriately trained, and have the scientific and/or clinical knowledge needed to monitor the trial adequately. A monitor’s qualifications should be documented. In addition, if or when sponsors perform audits as part of implementing quality assurance, they should consider the purpose of the audit, the selection and qualification of auditors, and the auditing procedures.

The BGD-GCP delineates that noncompliance with the protocol, SOPs, GCP, and/or applicable regulatory requirement(s) by an investigator/institution or member(s) of the sponsor’s staff should lead to prompt action by the sponsor to secure compliance. If the monitoring and/or auditing identify serious and/or persistent noncompliance on the part of an investigator/institution, the sponsor should terminate the investigator’s/ institution’s participation in the trial. When an investigator’s/institution’s participation is terminated because of noncompliance, the sponsor should notify the regulatory authority(ies) promptly. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) will enforce the rules and punitive action will be decided by the DGDA.

See the BGD-GCP for more detailed information on monitoring and auditing requirements.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

As per the BGD-GCP, if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor should promptly inform the investigators/institutions and the regulatory authority(ies) of the termination or suspension and the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. The ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor or by the investigator/institution, as specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s).

In addition, the BGD-GCP indicates that if the trial is prematurely terminated or suspended for any reason, the investigator/institution should promptly inform the trial participants, ensure appropriate therapy and follow-up for the participants, and, where required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), inform the regulatory authority(ies). If the investigator terminates or suspends a trial without the prior agreement of the sponsor, or if the sponsor terminates or suspends a trial, the investigator should inform the institution where applicable. The investigator/institution should promptly inform the sponsor and the EC and provide a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension. If the EC terminates or suspends its approval/favorable opinion of a trial, the investigator should inform the institution where applicable and the investigator/institution should promptly notify the sponsor and provide the sponsor with a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension.

The G-BMRC states that the criteria for termination of a trial must be defined in the trial proposal and a plan of interim analysis must be clearly presented. If the test drug is found more effective or less effective than the standard drug on interim analysis, the trial can be discontinued thereafter, and the better drug should be given to patient(s) receiving the less effective drug.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should utilize appropriately qualified individuals to supervise the overall conduct of the trial, handle the data, verify the data, conduct the statistical analyses, and prepare the trial reports. When using electronic trial data handling or remote electronic trial data systems, the sponsor should:

Ensure and document that the electronic data processing system(s) conform(s) to the sponsor's established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistent intended performance
Maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) for using these systems
Ensure that the systems are designed to permit data changes in such a way that the data changes are documented and that there is no deletion of entered data
Maintain a security system that prevents unauthorized access to the data, and a list of the individuals who are authorized to make data changes
Maintain adequate backup of the data
Safeguard the blinding, if any
For additional details, see the BGD-GCP.

Records Management

The BGD-GCP states that the sponsor, or other owners of the data, should retain all of the sponsor-specific essential documents pertaining to the trial (see Annexure 2 of the BGD-GCP). The sponsor should retain all sponsor-related essential documents in conformance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s) of the country(ies) where the investigational product (IP) is approved, and/or where the sponsor intends to apply for approval(s). The investigator/institution should also maintain the trial documents as specified in Annexure 2 of the BGD-GCP, and as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s). The investigator/institution should take measures to prevent accidental or premature destruction of these documents.

As per the BGD-GCP, the essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after the last marketing approval or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the IP. These documents should be retained for a longer period, however, if required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s) or if needed by the sponsor. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s)/institution(s) in writing of the need for record retention and should notify the investigator(s)/institution(s) in writing when the trial-related records are no longer needed.

The G-CROMF states that if applicable, a contract research organization (CRO) master file should be submitted to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) if requested. It should be succinct and, if possible, not exceed 25 A4 pages. An updated CRO master file should be submitted when requested by the DGDA, or if significant changes have been implemented by the CRO. See the G-CROMF for more information on the preparation of a CRO master file.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Responsible Parties

No information is currently available.

Data Protection

No information is currently available.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

According to the G-BMRC, participants must be informed of their rights regarding the storage and destruction of data. The G-BMRC also notes that it is good practice to notify all participants regarding the last approximate date it will be possible to withdraw their data (for example, prior to publication). Researchers should consider whether participants’ data will still be useful if they decide to withdraw. If this is the case, participants will need to consent to its use. They can be given the option to withdraw and also have their data withdrawn, or to withdraw but state that they will allow their data to be used. If a focus group is being carried out, it will not be possible to withdraw one (1) participant’s data following the intervention without removing the data for all the participants, because what one (1) participant says will affect the responses from others. It must be made clear on the participant information sheet that it will not be possible to withdraw data in this case.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Bangladeshi clinical trials, a freely given informed consent is required to be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the BGD-GCP and the G-BMRC.

As per the G-BMRC, BGD-15, and BGD-16, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) and provided to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) with the clinical trial application. The BGD-GCP further indicates that the investigator should have the written approval/favorable opinion from an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) of the written informed consent form and any other written information to be provided to participants.

The BGD-GCP states that in obtaining and documenting informed consent, the investigator should comply with good clinical practice (GCP) and to the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki (BGD-33). Neither the investigator, nor the trial staff, should coerce or unduly influence a participant to participate or to continue to participate in a trial. Before informed consent may be obtained, the investigator, or a person designated by the investigator, should provide the participant or the legal representative/guardian ample time and opportunity to inquire about details of the trial and to decide whether or not to participate in the trial. All questions about the trial should be answered to the satisfaction of the participant or the legal representative/guardian.

As per the BGD-GCP, the language used in the oral and written information about the trial, including the written ICF, should be as nontechnical as practical and should be understandable to the participant or the legal representative/guardian and the impartial witness, where applicable. Furthermore, none of the oral and written information concerning the trial, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or the legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive any legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator, the institution, the sponsor, or their agents from liability for negligence.

The G-BMRC further states that to obtain consent, the investigator must provide the participants with the opportunity and encouragement to ask questions. For studies without any intervention involving a large community, the investigator must also have the consent of the community. For more investigator requirements in obtaining consent, see the G-BMRC.

Re-Consent

According to the BGD-GCP, the ICF and any other written information to be provided to participants should be revised whenever important new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s consent. Any revised written ICF and written information should receive the EC's written approval/favorable opinion in advance of use. The participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial. The communication of this information should be documented.

Language Requirements

BGD-15 and BGD-16 indicate that the ICF, as well as the questionnaire or interview schedule, submitted to the BMRC must be provided in both Bengali and English.

As stated in the G-BMRC, the informed consent documentation must be inclusive. If the research involves participants who cannot speak or write English, the documentation needs to be translated (a professional translator needs to be employed unless the investigator is fluent in Bengali). Consideration for people with special needs, for example, dyslexia, will need to be included and the provision for alternative formats of documentation should be made.

Documenting Consent

According to the BGD-GCP, the investigator, or a person designated by the investigator, should fully inform the participant or, if the participant is unable to provide informed consent, the participant’s legal representative/guardian, of all pertinent aspects of the trial including the written information given approval/favorable opinion by the EC. Prior to a participant’s participation in the trial, the written ICF should be signed and personally dated by the participant or the legal representative/guardian, and by the person who conducted the informed consent discussion.

The BGD-GCP further delineates that if a participant is unable to read or if the legal representative/guardian is unable to read, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. After the written ICF and any other written information to be provided to participants is read and explained to the participant or the legal representative/guardian, and after the participant or the legal representative/guardian has orally consented to the participant’s participation in the trial, and, if capable of doing so, has signed and/or thumb printed and personally dated the ICF, the witness should sign and personally date the consent form. Prior to participation in the trial, the participant or the legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated written ICF and any other written information provided to the participants. During a participant’s participation in the trial, the participant or the legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated consent form updates and a copy of any amendments to the written information provided to participants.

Waiver of Consent

Per the BGD-GCP, where the protocol indicates that prior consent of the trial participants or the legal representative/guardian is not possible, the EC should determine that the proposed protocol and/or other document(s) adequately addresses relevant ethical concerns and meets applicable regulatory requirements for such trials (i.e., in emergency situations).

Per the IRB-Manual, the BMRC’s guidance for institutional ECs, individual consent is not required for a government-wide poll. For a non-intervention form of research or survey including an entire community, the community's consent is not required.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
According to the BGD-GCP, the G-BMRC, BGD-15, and BGD-16, the informed consent discussion, the written informed consent form (ICF), and any other written information to be provided to participants should include statements or descriptions of the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The interviewer’s details
That the trial involves research
The research method and purpose of the trial
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
The trial procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The participant’s responsibilities
Those aspects of the trial that are experimental
The measures to be taken to minimize risks
The reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant and, when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
The reasonably expected benefits; when there is no intended clinical benefit to the participant, the participant should be made aware of this
The alternative procedure(s) or course(s) of treatment that may be available to the participant, and their important potential benefits and risks
The compensation and/or treatment available to the participant in the event of trial-related injury
The anticipated prorated compensation, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
The anticipated expenses, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
That the participant’s participation in the trial is voluntary and that the participant may refuse to participate or withdraw from the trial, at any time, without penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled
That the monitor(s), the auditor(s), the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh), and the regulatory authority(ies) will be granted direct access to the participant’s original medical records for verification of clinical trial procedures and/or data, without violating the confidentiality of the participant, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and regulations and that, by signing a written ICF, the participant or legal representative/guardian is authorizing such access
That records identifying the participant will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and/or regulations, will not be made publicly available; the participant’s identity will remain confidential if trial results are published
That the participant or legal representative/guardian will be informed in a timely manner if information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial
The person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
The foreseeable circumstances and/or reasons under which the participant’s participation in the trial may be terminated
The expected duration of the participant’s participation in the trial
The approximate number of participants involved in the trial and criteria for selection of participants
The source of the investigational product (IP) that may be culturally unacceptable
See Annexure 1 of the BGD-GCP for an ICF template. See Annexure A of the IRB-Manual, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s guidance for institutional ECs, for an example of an ICF in both Bengali and English.

Compensation Disclosure

As set forth in the BGD-GCP, the reviewing EC should ensure that information regarding payment to participants, including the methods, amounts, and schedule of payment to trial participants, is set forth in the written ICF and any other written information to be provided to participants. The method of prorating payment should also be specified.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

The BGD-GCP states that in obtaining and documenting informed consent, the investigator should comply with good clinical practice (GCP) and the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki (BGD-33). In accordance with the BGD-GCP, the G-BMRC, BGD-15, and BGD-16, a participant’s rights must be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the BGD-GCP, a participant should be informed that participation is voluntary and that refusal to participate or withdraw from the trial is allowed, without penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

According to the G-BMRC, it is also necessary to make it as easy as possible for people to withdraw, bearing in mind that they might not feel comfortable telling the investigator directly that they no longer wish to participate. Options, such as posting a slip, will need to be included.

The Right to Information

According to the BGD-GCP, the G-BMRC, BGD-15, and BGD-16, a potential research participant or the legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per the BGD-GCP, the G-BMRC, BGD-15, and BGD-16, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right.

The G-BMRC indicates that participants should be told of the limits to the investigators' ability to safeguard confidentiality and of the anticipated consequences of breaches of confidentiality. Degree of importance of confidentiality depends on the nature of the research study. If the research study involves collection of data on sensitive issues, protections of confidentiality become prominent and essential. Limitations of the investigator related to breach of confidentiality and anticipated consequences of breaches of confidentiality should be told to participants.

The G-BMRC further states that it is the duty of the investigator to maintain appropriate confidentiality of research data. The investigator should handle the data in such a way that an individual remains unidentified. The investigator should adopt the following measures to maintain confidentiality:

Code numbers for data
Remove core sheets (containing names and addresses of the participants)
Omitting identifications
Prevent unlimited access to data
Train related manpower in confidentiality
Keep research records in locked cabinets
Provide security codes for computerized records
The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The BGD-GCP state that the ICF should include information on the person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury. As per the G-BMRC, the address of the contact person must also be provided in case of queries.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The G-BMRC indicates that during development of a research proposal, the investigator should consider respect for human dignity and protection of the rights and welfare of participants. The investigators should also be competent enough to safeguard the welfare of the research participants, and the researcher should oversee whether prevailing legal provisions and administrative arrangements ensure that the human rights and welfare of participants involved in health research are adequately considered and protected in conformity with ethical principles.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
The BGD-GCP states that in emergency situations, when prior consent of the participant is not possible, the consent of the legal representative/guardian, if present, should be requested. When prior consent of the participant is not possible, and the legal representative/guardian is not available, the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) should determine that the proposed protocol and/or other document(s) adequately addresses relevant ethical concerns and meets applicable regulatory requirements for such trials. In such instances, enrollment of the participant should require measures described in the protocol and/or elsewhere, with documented approval/favorable opinion by the EC, to protect the rights, safety, and well-being of the participant and to ensure compliance with applicable regulatory requirements. The participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible. Consent to continue and other consent, as appropriate, should be requested.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

According to the BGD-GCP and the G-BMRC, research participants from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process.

As per the BGD-GCP, vulnerable participants include individuals whose willingness to volunteer in a clinical trial may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation, or of a retaliatory response from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate. Examples are members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable participants include patients with incurable diseases, persons in nursing homes, unemployed, illiterate or impoverished persons, and patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.

The G-BMRC indicates that efforts should be made to ensure that individuals or communities invited for research are selected in such a way that the burdens and benefits of the research are equally distributed. Racial equalities should be maintained on genetic research, and economically or socially disadvantaged persons should not be used when there are persons better off than them. Involvement of those who have reduced autonomy as research participants, such as prisoners, students, subordinates, employees, and service personnel, requires adequate justification since the consent provided may be under duress or various other compelling reasons.

The BGD-GCP states that when a non-therapeutic trial is to be carried out with the consent of the participant’s legal representative/guardian, the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) should determine that the proposed protocol and/or other document(s) adequately addresses relevant ethical concerns and meets applicable regulatory requirements for such trials.

See the IRB-Manual for the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s guidance for institutional ECs regarding vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
The G-BMRC defines a child as a person below the age of 18. Consideration should be taken before involving children as study participants. Children should not be involved as participants in research that might be equally carried out in adults, and they should only participate in research to obtain knowledge regarding their health needs.

According to the G-BMRC, participation of children in a clinical evaluation of a new drug trial is permitted only after Phase III clinical trials in adults. If testing the therapeutic value of a drug in a primary disease of children, the study can be carried out earlier. Study design of interventions applied to a child participant for the benefit of diagnostic, preventive, or therapeutic purposes should be justified in relation to anticipated risks involved in the study and anticipated benefits to society. Such interventions should be at least as advantageous as any available alternative interventions. The benefit and risk to the child participant should be determined before intervention, otherwise the benefit will be low when compared to the knowledge that is to be gained. In addition, the study should be well designed to ensure adequate medical and psychological support to the parent and children.

The G-BMRC further indicates that consent should be obtained from the parent/legal guardian of each child before inclusion in the study. The parent/legal guardian is given the opportunity to observe the research as it proceeds to be able to withdraw the child if they decide that it is in the child’s best interest to do so.

Assent Requirements

As per the BGD-GCP, when a clinical trial includes minors, the participant should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with the participant’s understanding and, if capable, the participant should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

The G-BMRC delineates that consent from each child should be taken to the extent of the child’s intelligence and capabilities, such as in the case of mature minors from the age of seven (7) years up to the age of 18 years. Any child at any moment that wants to withdraw and/or refuse to participate in the study, even if the parent/legal guardian has given consent, should be respected unless there is no acceptable alternative medically recognized therapy.

See Annexure B of the IRB-Manual, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s guidance for institutional ECs, for an example of an assent form in both Bengali and English.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
The G-BMRC states that it is always best to avoid involvement of pregnant or nursing mothers in research except for trials which gather new knowledge on pregnancy, fetuses, and lactation where non-pregnant or non-nursing women are not suitable participants. The research should be well designed in such a way that protects or advances the health of pregnant or nursing women, fetuses, or nursing infants with no more than minimal risk.

According to the G-BMRC, it is mandatory to describe the opportunity and benefits to the women as participants in a study, and deprivation from any opportunity or benefit is unethical. Women should not be encouraged to discontinue nursing without proper assessment where breastfeeding is harmful to the infant, and compensation of supplementary food should be considered. At any time or while participating in research, women who desire to undergo medical termination of pregnancy should follow the applicable laws.

The G-BMRC further indicates that research involving prenatal diagnostic techniques to detect fetal genetic disorders or any abnormalities should follow the relevant World Health Organization (WHO) guideline.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
The G-BMRC indicates that efforts should be made to ensure that individuals or communities invited for research are selected in such a way that the burdens and benefits of the research are equally distributed. Involvement of those who have reduced autonomy as research participants, such as prisoners, requires adequate justification since the consent provided may be under duress or various other compelling reasons.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
According to the BGD-GCP, when a clinical trial includes participants who can only be enrolled in the trial with the consent of the legal representative/guardian (e.g., patients with severe dementia), the participant should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with the participant’s understanding and, if capable, the participant should sign and personally date the written informed consent. In addition, when a non-therapeutic trial is to be carried out with the consent of the participant’s legal representative/guardian, the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) should determine that the proposed protocol and/or other document(s) adequately addresses relevant ethical concerns and meets applicable regulatory requirements for such trials.

The G-BMRC states that the rights and welfare of mentally challenged and mentally differently able persons who are incapable of giving informed consent or those with behavioral disorders must be protected. Appropriate proxy consent from the legal representative/guardian should be taken after the person is well informed about the study, the need for participation, the risks and benefits involved, and the privacy and confidentiality procedures. The entire consent process should be properly documented.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
According to the BGD-GCP and the G-BGD-IP, an investigational product (IP) (also referred to as an investigational medicinal product (IMP) in Bangladesh) is any medicinal product which is being tested within a trial or any product, including placebo, that is being used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes products with marketing authorization when used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a way different from the approved form, when used for an unapproved indication (off-label use), or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Manufacturing

According to the DrugPolicy, the G-BGD-IP, and BGD-8, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of drugs, including investigational products (IPs) (also referred to as investigational medicinal products (IMPs)), in Bangladesh.

The DrugRules states that if the entity proposing to manufacture a drug for the purpose of examination, test, or analysis does not hold an existing license to manufacture drugs in Bangladesh, a Form 17 license (BGD-21) must be obtained before commencing such manufacture. The application for a Form 17 license (BGD-21) must be submitted to the DGDA using Form 18 (BGD-34), and must be made or countersigned by the head of the institution in which, or a director of the firm or company by which, the substance will be manufactured. A Form 17 license (BGD-21) will, unless sooner cancelled, be in force for one (1) year from the date of issue, and may thereafter be renewed one (1) year at a time.

According to the BGD-GCP, the IP(s) must be manufactured in good manufacturing practice (GMP)-compliant facilities. For investigational new drugs (INDs), the sponsor must submit the IND certificate from the national regulatory authority of the country of origin to the DGDA. In this case, the DGDA may consider the IND certificate from the country of origin if the country is a World Health Organization (WHO) Listed Authority (WLA) or a stringent regulatory authority. As per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should ensure that the IP(s) (including active comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable) is characterized as appropriate to the stage of development of the product(s), is manufactured in accordance with any applicable GMP, and is coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable. If required, the DGDA may conduct a GMP inspection of the IP manufacturing site. The DrugsCosAct indicates that if the manufacturer’s pharmacovigilance program is not conducted effectively, the DGDA’s Director General may temporarily suspend or cancel the license of the concerned establishment to manufacture drugs.

The G-BGD-IP further indicates that release of a product is contingent upon providing the GMP certificate, the Certificate of Analysis (CoA), and a data log (See Annexure 2 of the G-BGD-IP). Additionally, IPs manufactured for clinical trials must comply with GMP guidelines from the WHO, the European Union (EU), the Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S), or the United States (US).

Import

According to the G-BGD-IP and the BGD-GCP, the DGDA is responsible for authorizing the import of IPs into Bangladesh. Permission for importing IPs is issued by the DGDA as a no objection certificate (NOC). The G-BGD-IP specifies that in the application for an NOC to import/locally collect IPs, the sponsor/principal investigator (PI) should mention the amount they want to import/collect with the justification (See Annexure 6 of the G-BGD-IP or BGD-18 for the Application Form of Import of IMPs/Placebo, and see Annexure 7 for the Checklist of NOC for IMPs). The DGDA will verify the amount according to the protocol and issue the NOC. The manufacturer providing the IP(s) must also obtain a relevant license/permission from the DGDA. The DGDA has a legal responsibility to ensure that the IP has been manufactured in accordance with GMP and meets the conditions of the clinical trial authorization and the product specification file (PSF) (See Annexure 1 of the G-BGD-IP).

The DrugsCosAct indicates that as with the manufacture license, an import license may be temporarily suspended or canceled by the DGDA Director General if the manufacturer’s pharmacovigilance program is not conducted effectively.

The BGD-GCP states that all importation of clinical trial drugs should go through customs even though a clinical trial import license has been obtained or a NOC has been received from the DGDA. In addition, the G-BGD-IP indicates that shipping of IPs should be conducted according to instructions given by or on behalf of the sponsor in the shipping order.

As per the G-BGD-IP, DGDA officer(s) may inspect the premises of the trial site/sponsor/contract research organization (CRO) facilities to evaluate the following documents:

The CoA of each batch of the IP(s) as well as comparator(s), if relevant
A copy of the letter of approval of clinical trial
A copy of a valid GMP certificate for the IP issued by the competent regulatory authority in the country of origin
The cover sheet should be completed by the sponsor and accompany each consignment of IPs (See Annexure 4 of the G-BGD-IP or BGD-18)
Please note: Bangladesh is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (BGD-2), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see BGD-4.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

As per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor is generally responsible for ensuring that an up-to date Investigator’s Brochure (IB) is made available to the investigator(s), and the investigators are responsible for providing the up-to date IB to the responsible ethics committees (ECs) (referred to as independent ethics committees (IECs)/institutional review boards (IRBs) in Bangladesh). The sponsor should provide the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the protocol and an up-to-date IB before entering an agreement with an investigator/institution to conduct a trial. In the case of an investigator sponsored trial, the sponsor-investigator should determine whether a brochure is available from the commercial manufacturer. If the investigational product (IP) (also referred to as an investigational medicinal product (IMP) in Bangladesh) is provided by the sponsor-investigator, then the sponsor-investigator should provide the necessary information to the trial personnel. In cases where preparation of a formal IB is impractical, the sponsor-investigator should provide, as a substitute, an expanded background information section in the trial protocol that contains the minimum current information described in the BGD-GCP.

The BGD-GCP indicates that when planning trials, the sponsor should ensure that sufficient safety and efficacy data from nonclinical studies and/or clinical trials are available to support human exposure by the route, at the dosages, for the duration, and in the trial population to be studied. According to the BGD-GCP and the G-BGD-IP, the sponsor should update the IB as significant new information becomes available.

As per the BGD-GCP, the IB is a compilation of the clinical and nonclinical data on the IP(s) that are relevant to the study of the product(s) in human participants. Its purpose is to provide the investigators and others involved in the trial with the information to facilitate their understanding of the rationale for, and their compliance with, many key features of the protocol, such as the dose, dose frequency/interval, methods of administration, and safety monitoring procedures. The IB should include:

Title page
Confidentiality statement
Table of contents
Summary
Introduction
Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation
Information on nonclinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and product metabolism in animals, toxicology)
Information on effects in humans (pharmacokinetics and product metabolism; safety and efficacy; marketing experience)
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator
See the BGD-GCP for detailed content guidelines.

Quality Management

The G-BGD-IP states that the sponsor or principal investigator (PI) should submit to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) the good manufacturing practice (GMP) certificate of the manufacturing plant from the national regulatory authority of the country of origin. IPs should be produced in accordance with the principles and guidelines of GMP for medical products. Production processes for IPs are not expected to be validated to the extent necessary for routine production, but premises and equipment are expected to be qualified.

The G-BGD-IP further indicates that release of a product is contingent upon providing the GMP certificate, the Certificate of Analysis (CoA), and a data log (See Annexure 2 of the G-BGD-IP). IPs manufactured for clinical trials must comply with GMP guidelines from the World Health Organization (WHO), the European Union (EU), the Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S), or the United States (US).

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Labeling for investigational products (IPs) (also referred to as investigational medicinal products (IMPs) in Bangladesh) must comply with the requirements set forth in the BGD-GCP and the G-BGD-IP. The BGD-GCP indicates that the sponsor should ensure that the IP(s) (including active comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable) is coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable. In blinded trials, the coding system for the IP(s) should include a mechanism that permits rapid identification of the product(s) in case of a medical emergency but does not permit undetectable breaks of the blinding.

According to the G-BGD-IP, labeling should comply with the requirements of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA). The following information should be included on labels, unless its absence can be justified:

The name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor, contract research organization (CRO), or investigator (the main contact for information on the IP, clinical trial, and emergency unblinding)
The pharmaceutical dosage form, route of administration, quantity of dosage units, and in the case of open trials, name/identifier and strength/potency
The batch and/or code number to identify the contents and packaging operation
A trial reference code allowing identification of the trial, site, investigator, and sponsor, if not given elsewhere
The trial participant identification number or treatment number and, where relevant, the visit number
The investigator’s name (if not already provided on the label)
The directions for use (reference may be made to a leaflet or other explanatory document intended for the trial subject or person administering the product)
“For Clinical Trial Use Only” or similar wording
The storage conditions
The period of use (use-by date, expiration date, or re-test date, as applicable), in month/year format and in a manner that avoids any ambiguity
"Keep Out of Reach of Children" except when the product is for use in trials where the product is not taken home by participants
For additional detailed labelling information, see the G-BGD-IP.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

The BGD-GCP indicates that the sponsor should not supply an investigator/institution with the investigational products(s) (IP(s)) (also referred to as investigational medicinal products (IMPs) in Bangladesh) until the sponsor obtains all required documentation, such as a favorable opinion from an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA). The G-BGD-IP further states that the IPs should remain under the control of the sponsor.

According to the BGD-GCP and the G-BGD-IP, the sponsor is responsible for supplying the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the IP(s) and should ensure timely delivery of IP(s) to the investigator(s). Per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should:

Take steps to ensure that the IP(s) are stable over the period of use
Maintain sufficient quantities of the IP(s) used in the trials to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary, and maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics. To the extent stability permits, samples should be retained either until the analyses of the trial data are complete or as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), whichever represents the longer retention period
The G-BGD-IP indicates that the packaging must ensure the IP remains in good condition during transport and storage at intermediate destinations. Any opening or tampering of the outer packaging during transport should be readily discernible. The BGD-GCP further states that the IP(s) should be packaged to prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage.

The BGD-GCP further indicates that the sponsor should determine, for the IP(s), acceptable storage temperatures, storage conditions (e.g., protection from light), storage times, reconstitution fluids and procedures, and devices for product infusion, if any. The sponsor should inform all involved parties (e.g., monitors, investigators, pharmacists, storage managers) of these determinations. As per the BGD-GCP and the G-BGD-IP, the sponsor should also ensure that written procedures include instructions that the investigator/institution should follow for the handling and storage of IP(s) for the trial and documentation thereof. The procedures should address adequate and safe receipt, handling, storage, dispensing, and retrieval of unused product from participants, and return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor (or alternative disposition if authorized by the sponsor and in compliance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s)).

The G-BGD-IP states that all IPs used and unused must be accounted for by the study monitor/sponsor. Disposal of used or unused IPs must be initiated only after the written instruction from the sponsor/study monitor has been obtained. After finishing the trial, the sponsor/principal investigator must inform the DGDA about the remaining and used amount of IPs using the form in Annexure 5 of the G-BGD-IP.

For more information on the destruction of IPs or the return of IPs to the sponsor, see the G-BGD-IP.

Record Requirements

Per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should:

Maintain records that document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP(s)
Maintain a system for retrieving IPs and documenting this retrieval (e.g., for deficient product recall, reclaim after trial completion, expired product reclaim)
Maintain a system for the disposition of unused IP(s) and for the documentation of this disposition.
The G-BGD-IP delineates that IP records must be maintained to demonstrate adherence to the trial protocol and credibility and integrity of the data. The BGD-GCP further indicates that the investigator/institution and/or a pharmacist, or other appropriate individual who is designated by the investigator/institution, should maintain records of the IP's delivery to the trial site, the inventory at the site, the use by each participant, and the return to the sponsor or alternative disposition of unused product(s). These records should include dates, quantities, batch/serial numbers, expiration dates (if applicable), and the unique code numbers assigned to the IP(s) and trial participants. Investigators should maintain records that document adequately that the participants were provided the doses specified by the protocol and reconcile all IP(s) received from the sponsor.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
As per the G-BMRC, human biological samples include whole or part of organs, tissues, cells (somatic and gonadal), bodily fluids or samples like serum, buffy coat, DNA, hair, nails, excreta, sweat, buccal scrapings, etc.

The G-BMRC also defines identified specimens as those linked to personal information in such a way that the person from whom the material was obtained could be identified by name, patient number, or clear pedigree location (e.g., the person’s relationship to a family member whose identity is known). Unidentified specimens are those for which identifiable personal information was not collected or, if collected, was not maintained and cannot be retrieved by the repository.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Import

The G-BMRC indicates that the import of biological materials for research and development should be regulated by the Government of Bangladesh. Clinical trials using cells after major manipulation or those sponsored by multinational entities involving stem cell products imported from abroad require prior approval of the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC) and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW).

Export

According to the G-BMRC, ethical issues exist pertaining to consent requirements for the banking and further uses of tissue and DNA samples, their control and ownership, and the benefit sharing to the individual or community. Permission must be obtained for shipping repository samples abroad.

Material Transfer Agreement

The G-BMRC states that when using repository research samples, there should be appropriate material transfer agreements (MTAs) with the repository for depositing samples as well as for taking them out with clear reasons. Third parties must be allowed to take samples only after approval from the BMRC’s repository ethics committee.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
According to the G-BMRC, the sample collector must obtain informed consent from the donor for DNA banking or for cell-line transformation and banking. The process of seeking informed consent for purposes of banking must clearly be stated in addition to possible risks and benefits, the conditions under which samples from the repository will be provided to other researchers, how long and in what condition the samples will be preserved in the repository, and what the costs to individual researchers will be in obtaining samples from the repository. The sample collector must also clearly inform all donors that they reserve the right to order destruction of their samples from the repository at any time. To prevent any exploitation and protect the rights of participants, the main requirements at collection level are:

Individual informed consent
Approval of the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh)
Approval of the Repository Ethics Committee (which may be formed by the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC))
For more information on using repository samples, see the G-BMRC.

Requirements
(Legislation) Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 2023 (DrugsCosAct – Bengali) (English-DrugsCosAct – Unofficial Translation) (September 18, 2023)
Bangladesh National Parliament
(Regulation) The Bengal Drug Rules, 1946 (DrugRules) (As amended up to December 1952)
Government of East Bengal
(Guidance) Ethical Guidelines for Conducting Research Studies Involving Human Subjects (G-BMRC) (Date Unavailable)
Bangladesh Medical Research Council
(Guidance) Guidance on Clinical Trial Inspection (G-CTInspect) (July 3, 2018)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for GMP, Import, Export, and Destruction of Investigational Medical Products (IMPs) for Clinical Trials Bangladesh (G-BGD-IP) (Version 01) (Effective December 2021)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products Bangladesh (BGD-GCP) (Version 02) (Effective December 2023)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Registration of Human Vaccines (G-BGD-Vaccine) (Version 01) (Effective March 30, 2022)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Regulatory Approvals of Stem Cell and Cell Based Products (SCCPs) (G-SCCPs) (Date Unavailable)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Preparation of a Contract Research Organization Master File Bangladesh (G-CROMF) (July 5, 2018)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Guidance) Manual on Institutional Review Boards (IRB-Manual) (Date Unavailable)
Bangladesh Medical Research Council and World Health Organization
(Policy) National Drug Policy, 2016 (DrugPolicy - Bengali) (English-DrugPolicy - Unofficial Translation) (March 23, 2018)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Resolution) Resolution No. ME-11/3.4/76/371. (BMRC-Res) (August 31, 1976)
Ministry of Health, Labour and Social Welfare
Additional Resources
(Document) Annexure of Clinical Trial SOP (BGD-24) (Date Unavailable)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Document) Application Format for Clinical Trial Protocol Approval (BGD-22) (Date Unavailable)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Document) Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) – Organogram (BGD-9 – Bengali) (Last Updated February 12, 2025)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Document) Documents to be Submitted for Ethical Approval (BGD-15) (2021)
Bangladesh Medical Research Council
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (BGD-2) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for Ethical Approval (BGD-16) (2021)
National Research Ethics Committee, Bangladesh Medical Research Council
(International Guidance) Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (BGD-32) (Step 4 Version) (October 27, 1994)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (BGD-33) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Guideline: General Principles for Planning and Design of Multi-Regional Clinical Trials (E17) (BGD-6) (Final Version) (November 16, 2017)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (BGD-31) (Step 4 Version) (November 30, 1995)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BGD-29) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with icddr,b (June 2024) (BGD-7)
(Webpage) Bangladesh Medical Research Council – Contact (BGD-30) (Current as of October 9, 2025)
Bangladesh Medical Research Council
(Webpage) Bangladesh Medical Research Council – Functions (BGD-36) (Current as of October 9, 2025)
Bangladesh Medical Research Council
(Webpage) Country Profile: Bangladesh (BGD-4) (Current as of October 9, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) – Clinical Trial Guidelines and Forms (BGD-14 – Bengali) (Last Updated March 12, 2025)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Webpage) Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) – History (BGD-8 – Bengali) (Last Updated February 13, 2025)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Webpage) Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) – List of Clinical Trials (BGD-19 – Bengali) (Last Updated May 24, 2025)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Webpage) Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) – Map (BGD-28 – English and Bengali) (Last Updated March 4, 2021)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Webpage) Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) (Old Site) (BGD-13) (Last Updated September 7, 2025)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
Forms
(Form) Application for Institutional Review Board (I.R.B) Clearance - Student (BGD-10) (Date Unavailable)
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University
(Form) Application for Institutional Review Board (I.R.B) Clearance - Teacher (BGD-11) (Date Unavailable)
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University
(Form) Application for Licence to Manufacture Drugs for the Purpose of Examination, Test or Analysis (Form 18) (BGD-34) (Last Updated September 11, 2015)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Form) Licence to Manufacture Drugs for the Purpose of Research (Form 17) (BGD-21) (Last Updated September 11, 2015)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Form) List of Documents Required for IRB/IEC Approval from DGDA (BGD-17) (Date Unavailable)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Form) Required Documents for NOC for Investigational Medicinal Products (IMPs) (BGD-18) (June 19, 2024)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Bangladesh
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
Unspecified
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
No
Clinical trial registration required
Yes
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
No
Age of minors
Under 18
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
In Bangladesh, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) and the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC) are involved in clinical trial oversight and coordination.

Directorate General of Drug Administration

As per the DrugsCosAct and the BGD-GCP, the DGDA is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial oversight and inspections in Bangladesh. According to the DrugsCosAct, the DGDA also licenses establishments involved with manufacturing, selling, importing, and exporting of drugs; implements pharmacovigilance activities; and inspects and supervises establishments that manufacture and sell drugs.

The BGD-GCP indicates that the DGDA provides the legal framework for clinical trials. The DGDA’s responsibilities include approval and inspection of clinical trial facilities, study protocol approval, and authorizing the import of clinical trial investigational products, with the goal of protecting the safety and rights of trial participants and ensuring that trials are adequately designed to meet scientifically sound objectives. In addition, the DGDA approves and oversees ethics committee (EC) activities (Note: ECs are also referred to as independent ethics committees (IECs)/institutional review boards (IRBs) in Bangladesh).

According to BGD-8, the DGDA also ensures the quality, safety, efficacy, and usefulness of drugs and medicines which are produced, imported, and marketed in Bangladesh, as well as exported overseas. This includes issuing and renewing licenses for drug manufacturing. Additionally, the DGDA engages in pharmacovigilance activities. See BGD-9 for the DGDA organogram.

Bangladesh Medical Research Council

The G-BMRC indicates that the BMRC, established by the BMRC-Res, is an autonomous body that operates under the MOHFW. The BMRC’s objectives are to identify problems and issues relating to medical and health sciences and to determine priority areas in research based on healthcare needs, goals, policies, and objectives. The BMRC also provides advice on all health research related matters to government departments and international agencies.

As per the G-BMRC and BGD-36, the BMRC organizes and promotes scientific research in various fields of medicine, public health, reproductive health, and nutrition with specific references to primary health care needs for the application and utilization of health research results. BGD-36 further indicates that the BMRC trains the health research workforce through workshops/training programs, and organizes and disseminates research information through publications, research seminars, workshops, and orientation courses. Additionally, the BMRC initiates, assists, promotes, and coordinates scientific research in the field of health in medical institutions and helps such institutions in developing expertise and facilities for health research.

As stated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, any health research to be conducted in Bangladesh must be registered with the BMRC. In addition to obtaining the DGDA’s permission to conduct research in Bangladesh, an applicant must obtain ethics approval from the BMRC’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC). For more information on the NREC, see the Ethics Committee section.

Other Considerations

Please note: Bangladesh is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (BGD-2), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see BGD-4.

Contact Information

Directorate General of Drug Administration

According to BGD-13 and BGD-28, the DGDA’s contact information is as follows:

Directorate General of Drug Administration
Aushad Bhavan
Mohakhali Bazar Rd, Dhaka-1212, Bangladesh

Phone: +8802-9880803, +8802-9880864, +8802-9880897, +8802-9880924
Fax: +8802-9880854
Email: dgda.gov@gmail.com

Bangladesh Medical Research Council

As per BGD-30, the BMRC’s contact information is as follows:

Bangladesh Medical Research Council
BMRC Bhaban
Mohakhali, Dhaka-1212, Bangladesh

Phone: +8802-222299311, +8802-222298396
Fax: +880-2-222263820
Email: info@bmrcbd.org

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

As per the BGD-GCP, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) is responsible for reviewing, evaluating, and approving clinical trial applications for drugs in Bangladesh. According to the G-BMRC, Phase I-III clinical trials require DGDA clearance, while all phases require ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) approval.

The BGD-GCP and BGD-22 indicate that ethical clearance by an EC is a required element of a clinical trial application to the DGDA. Therefore, DGDA review and ethics review may not be conducted in parallel. (Note: According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) is registered with the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) as an official IRB.)

See the Scope of Review section for detailed information on ethical approval processes.

Clinical Trial Review Process

According to the BGD-GCP, the DGDA must ensure that clinical trial protocols are submitted in advance for review and in accordance with existing national regulations. During its review of clinical trial protocols and/or reports, the DGDA may propose revisions or request additional data on a clinical trial or terminate a trial. The DGDA also evaluates the adequacy of supervision of the trial by reviewing the monitor’s reports to the sponsor. The principal investigator (PI) or contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for submitting the clinical trial application. BGD-22 indicates that the protocol is then screened by the DGDA Clinical Trial Cell before it is sent to the Clinical Trial Advisory Committee.

As delineated in the DrugsCosAct, the DGDA may obtain a legal opinion or technical analysis/opinion on any matter from one (1) or more persons who are experts or have special knowledge/experience in the matter concerned or may invite them to attend meetings. The BGD-GCP states that the MOHFW’s Clinical Trial Advisory Committee, an expert committee comprised of medical experts of different specialties, supports the DGDA with evaluating/reviewing protocols. In the case of major or critical noncompliance, such as a faulty trial design, the Clinical Trial Advisory Committee will not recommend the protocol for approval. The DGDA’s Clinical Trial Cell will issue a notice to the PI, specifying the reasons for disapproval of the protocol as recommended by the Clinical Trial Advisory Committee/Clinical Trial Cell. See the BGD-GCP for more information on the Clinical Trial Advisory Committee.

Per the DrugsCosAct and the BGD-GCP, the DGDA may accept clinical trial information or approved data received from foreign drug regulatory authorities. Additionally, the DGDA may, subject to the approval of the government, approve fast track clinical trials in case of new drugs for emergency health care or epidemic diseases, or during a public health emergency.

The BGD-GCP indicates that protocol amendments and time extensions should be submitted to the DGDA with justification. As stated in BGD-22, any amendment, addendum, site change, or modification of the clinical trial must be approved by the DGDA. If new investigators are added after initiation of the study, their curriculum vitaes (CVs) must be submitted to the DGDA. See the Timeline of Review section and BGD-22 for detailed information on protocol approval, amendment, and fast track timelines.

As per the BGD-GCP, the DGDA carries out on-site inspections of the clinical trial site. Such inspections may be carried out routinely, randomly, and/or for specific reasons, and should consist of a comparison of the procedures and practices of the investigator with those set out in the protocol and reports submitted to the DGDA by the investigator or the sponsor. The DGDA may also conduct risk-based good clinical practice (GCP) inspections. The inspection should determine whether the investigator has custody of the required records or, if not, who has assumed this responsibility. The data archives should be tested for ease of retrieval. Inspections may include data audit. The DGDA should have easy access to all patient files and raw data used for and generated during the trial. As stated in the G-CTInspect, the aims of the clinical trial inspection program are to verify: GCP compliance to protect the rights, safety, and well-being of trial participants; the credibility and integrity of clinical trial data generated; and compliance with applicable regulatory provisions. For more information, see the G-CTInspect.

The DrugsCosAct and the BGD-GCP indicate that if there is any risk to the participants during the clinical trial, the DGDA Director General may temporarily or permanently stop the trial.

See BGD-14 for a list of clinical trial guidelines and forms. Also see the G-BGD-Vaccine and the G-SCCPs for guidelines on human vaccine registration and stem cell/cell based product approval, respectively.

(See the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for detailed submission requirements and review processes.)

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Directorate General of Drug Administration

As per the BGD-GCP, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) will charge fees for clinical trial protocol applications and pay reasonable per diem to the members of the Clinical Trial Advisory Committee for attending evaluation meetings. Specific fee amounts are not available at this time.

Payment Instructions

No information is available regarding payment instructions.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

According to the BGD-GCP and BGD-22, ethical clearance by an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) is a required element of a clinical trial application to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA). (Note: The Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) is registered with the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) as an official IRB.)

As delineated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the applicant must obtain ethics approval from the NREC, which reviews all clinical trials of both non-registered medicinal substances in Bangladesh and new indications of already registered medicinal substances. The NREC also sets standards, advises the MOHFW and other departments on the management of research ethics for Bangladesh, and arbitrates on matters of ethics.

However, per BGD-7, the DGDA requires review and approval by an institution’s/organization’s EC for all clinical trials involving humans. Clinical trials that obtain ethical approval from certain well-established ECs do not require NREC approval.

The IRB-Manual indicates that there are several ECs that review and issue ethical clearance for an institution’s/organization’s students or faculty regarding their research. For more information, see the Scope of Review section.

Ethics Committee Composition

Institutional Ethics Committee

As stated in the BGD-GCP, the EC should consist of a reasonable number of members, who collectively have the qualifications and experience to review and evaluate the science, medical aspects, and ethics of the proposed trial. It is recommended that the EC include at least five (5) members, at least one (1) member whose primary area of interest is in a nonscientific area, and at least one (1) member who is independent of the institutional/trial site.

The IRB-Manual further specifies that there must be adequate experience, knowledge, and variety among the members to make an educated judgment. In addition, the EC:

Will have a chairman appointed to it
Must include men and women
Should be interdisciplinary and cross-sectoral
Should include both scientific and non-scientific specialists, such as a lawyer, a religious expert, and laypeople
Must have at least one (1) member (if it is a five (5)-member committee) who is not linked with the institution. For bigger committees, at least 40% of the members should be external to the institute/organization
See the BGD-GCP and the IRB-Manual for additional details on EC composition requirements.

National Research Ethics Committee

According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the NREC was formed by the BMRC and consists of nine (9) to 13 members. BGD-16 indicates that NREC membership includes a chairman and member secretary. A lawyer, female representative, religious leader, and research methodologist/biostatistician are obligatory members. All relevant new guidelines should be brought to the attention of the members. No information is currently available regarding requirements surrounding NREC renewal or expiration of tenure.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

Institutional Ethics Committee

Per the BGD-GCP, the EC must follow international guidelines on ethical issues and the safety of human participants exposed to clinical trials, including the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BGD-29) and the Declaration of Helsinki (BGD-33).

The BGD-GCP indicates that the list of EC members and their qualifications should be maintained. Additionally, the EC should perform its functions according to written operating procedures, maintain written records of its activities and minutes of its meetings, and comply with good clinical practice (GCP) and the applicable regulatory requirement(s). The EC must be independent of the institution/contract research organization (CRO), and all activities must be transparent.

Per the BGD-GCP, only EC members who are independent of the investigator and the sponsor of the trial should vote/provide opinion on a trial-related matter. An EC should make decisions at announced meetings at which at least a quorum, as stipulated in its written operating procedures, is present. The IRB-Manual specifies that quorum is defined as the presence of a majority of members at a meeting. EC members must not vote on their own projects, but all other EC members are eligible to vote. The presence of more than half of the EC members is required to vote on a proposal, and a non-scientist must be present as well.

The BGD-GCP further states that only members who participate in the EC review and discussion should vote/provide their opinion and/or advice. Every member should sign a declaration of conflict of interest. The investigator may provide information on any aspects of the trial, but should not participate in the deliberations or the vote/opinion of the EC. An EC may also invite nonmembers with expertise in special areas for assistance.

As required in the BGD-GCP, the EC should establish and follow written procedures, which should include:

Determining its composition (names and qualifications of the members) and the authority under which it is established
Scheduling, notifying its members of, and conducting its meetings
Conducting an initial and continuing review of trials
Determining the frequency of continuing review, as appropriate
Providing, according to the applicable regulatory requirements, expedited review and approval/favorable opinion of minor change(s) in ongoing trials that have the approval/favorable opinion of the EC
Specifying that no participant should be admitted to a trial before the EC issues its written approval/favorable opinion of the trial
Specifying that no deviations from, or changes of, the protocol should be initiated without prior written EC approval/favorable opinion of an appropriate amendment, except when necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to the participants or when the change(s) involves only logistical or administrative aspects of the trial (e.g., change of monitor(s), telephone number(s))
In addition, the BGD-GCP indicate that the EC should retain all relevant records (e.g., written procedures, membership lists, lists of occupations/affiliations of members, submitted documents, minutes of meetings, and correspondence) for at least three (3) years after completion of the trial and make them available upon request from the DGDA. The EC may also be asked by investigators, sponsors, or regulatory authorities to provide its written procedures and membership lists.

See the BGD-GCP and the IRB-Manual for additional EC terms of reference and review procedure requirements.

National Research Ethics Committee

BGD-16 indicates that NREC members should be encouraged to attend national and international training programs in research ethics for maintaining quality in ethical review and to be aware of the latest developments in this area.

According to BGD-16, the NREC will conduct a meeting every two (2) months, but the frequency of meetings may increase depending on the number of applications. The agenda should incorporate sufficient time for discussion of the applications. The chairperson will conduct all NREC meetings. In the absence of the chairperson, NREC members will elect a chairperson who will conduct the meeting. The member secretary is responsible for organizing the meetings, maintaining the records, and relevant communication. The notice of a meeting should be issued at least seven (7) days before the meeting.

As per BGD-16, minutes of the previous meeting should be maintained. Proceedings of the meetings should be confidential and maintained in a standard format and should be prepared within three (3) working days after the meeting. Additionally, the NREC should have the following documentation, which should be archived:

Copy of all study protocols with enclosed documents, progress reports, and serious adverse events (SAEs)
Minutes of all meetings
Copy of all existing relevant national and international guidelines on research ethics and laws along with amendments
Copy of all correspondence with members, researchers, and other regulatory bodies
Final report of the approved projects
Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

As per the BGD-GCP, ethics committees (ECs) (referred to as independent ethics committees (IECs)/institutional review boards (IRBs) in Bangladesh) are responsible for ensuring the protection of the rights, safety, and well-being of human participants involved in a clinical trial. It is also an EC’s responsibility to provide public assurance of that protection, by, among other things, reviewing and approving/providing a favorable opinion on the trial protocol, as well as the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, and the methods and material to be used in obtaining and documenting informed consent of the trial participants. The EC also provides continuing review of the trial protocol and amendments, and of the methods and material to be used.

The BGD-GCP further indicates that special attention should be paid to trials that may include vulnerable participants. An EC should follow the rules, regulations, and ethical guidelines of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA).

According to the G-BMRC, research requires ethical approval as a part of good research governance to:

Safeguard the dignity, rights, safety, and well-being of all potential research participants
Protect the rights of a researcher to carry out legitimate investigation, as well as the reputation of the institution
Minimize potential for claims of negligence made against the researchers, the institution concerned, and any collaborating individual or organization
Require evidence of ethical approval in refereed journals
Influence the research design with ethical consideration
Avoid potential problems later by ensuring that the main ethical issues are addressed before the research starts
As per the G-BMRC, strict guidelines on human genetics research must be followed in order to control and carefully use and disseminate information generated, such that it does not lead to misuse or commercial acquisition. Research protocols should follow established procedures for review and informed consent. The G-BMRC does not specify any particular guidelines or procedures.

The G-BMRC further states that a research proposal involving gene therapy must be evaluated based on medical, scientific, ethical, and safety aspects. The proposal must be first approved by the concerned institutional biosafety committee before submittal to the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC). See the G-BMRC for more specific guidelines involving human genetic and genomic research, including stem cell research.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

The BGD-GCP and BGD-22 state that ethical clearance by an EC is a required element of a clinical trial application to the DGDA. Therefore, DGDA review and ethics review may not be conducted in parallel. (Note: According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the BMRC’s NREC is registered with the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) as an official IRB.)

As delineated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the applicant must obtain ethics approval from the NREC.

However, per BGD-7, the DGDA requires review and approval by an institution’s/organization’s EC for all clinical trials involving humans. Clinical trials that obtain ethical approval from certain well-established ECs do not require NREC approval.

Institutional Ethics Committee

The IRB-Manual states that simple interventional studies such as health educational interventions, psychological interventions, community interventions, treatment regimens using DGDA approved drugs, and students’ theses/dissertations on small-scale clinical trials can be approved by institutional ECs. There are several ECs that review and issue ethical clearance for the institution’s/organization’s students or faculty regarding their research. An institution’s/organization's EC is only allowed to examine its own research protocols. However, if an institution/organization has no EC, it may obtain ethical approval of its protocols from a nearby EC.

Per the BGD-GCP, the EC should consider the qualifications of the investigator for the proposed trial, as documented by a current curriculum vitae (CV) and/or by any other relevant documentation the EC requests.

The BGD-GCP further states that the EC should review a proposed clinical trial within a reasonable time and document its views in writing, clearly identifying the trial, the documents reviewed, and the dates for the following: approval/favorable opinion; modifications required prior to its approval/favorable opinion; disapproval/negative opinion; and termination/suspension of any prior approval/favorable opinion. Additionally, the EC should conduct a continuing review of each ongoing trial at intervals appropriate to the degree of risk to human participants, but at least once a year.

As indicated in the BGD-GCP, any deviations from, or changes of, the protocol to eliminate immediate hazards to the trial participants, or changes increasing the risk to participants and/or affecting significantly the conduct of the trial, should be promptly reported by the investigator to the EC. Furthermore, the investigator should not implement a deviation from, or a change of, the protocol without prior EC approval/favorable opinion, except where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to trial participants, or when the change(s) involves only logistical or administrative aspects of the trial. As soon as possible, the implemented deviation or change, the reasons for it, and, if appropriate, the proposed protocol amendment(s) should be submitted to the EC for review and approval/favorable opinion; to the sponsor for agreement; and, if required, to the DGDA.

According to the BGD-GCP, if the EC terminates or suspends its approval/favorable opinion of a trial, the investigator should inform the institution where applicable and the investigator/institution should promptly notify the sponsor and provide the sponsor with a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension.

National Research Ethics Committee

According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the NREC reviews all clinical trials of both non-registered medicinal substances in Bangladesh and new indications of already registered medicinal substances. Research involving issues of religious or social sensitivity must be approved by the NREC. International collaborative research involving the Bangladeshi population must also receive ethical approval from the NREC, in addition to the government’s administrative approval.

The IRB-Manual further notes that all clinical trials on new drugs or molecules or devices, including bioequivalence and biosimilar studies, should be approved by the NREC. Additionally, only the NREC has the authority to examine a protocol from any institution, whether collaborative or not. As delineated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, scientific validity should be approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee before submission of a research project to the NREC. As per BGD-16, if a research proposal is not approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee, then it should be approved by the Scientific Review Committee of the BMRC before submission to the NREC. The NREC gives final ethical approval to research proposals, while the Scientific Review Committee analyzes whether the research proposal is of good scientific quality and value. The Scientific Review Committee also reviews the validity and feasibility of the protocol and cited relevant scientific literature (if any) of the proposed research, as well as ethical issues by peer review process. No additional information is available regarding the Scientific Review Committee’s role in review of ethical issues.

BGD-16 further indicates that all decisions will be communicated to the principal investigator (PI) in writing.

As delineated in BGD-16, expedited review may be granted when the research proposal is approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee as methodologically sound without any intervention and risk of distress or injury, physical or psychological, to the participants. The expedited proposal, along with justification, is presented to the NREC at its next meeting.

According to BGD-16, research proposals from university, medical college, or institution undergraduate students that are submitted with a recommendation from the head of the institution or institutional EC approval may be given an exemption from peer review. The exemption may be given if there is no intervention and risk of distress or injury, physical or psychological, to the participants. The NREC Chairman may give ethical approval of the proposal on the condition that the proposal must be submitted in the next NREC meeting.

The G-BMRC states that in the case of protocol deviation, approval from the NREC must be obtained and the licensing authority must be notified.

The G-BMRC and BGD-16 also indicate that the NREC conducts post-approval monitoring of clinical trials.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Institutional Ethics Committee

Per the BGD-GCP, ethics committees (ECs) (referred to as independent ethics committees (IECs)/institutional review boards (IRBs) in Bangladesh) may charge fees for their services, such as ethical evaluations of protocols and ethical/good clinical practice (GCP) compliance inspections (as required). Fees are fixed by the EC and endorsed by the organization. An annual financial audit system should be in place, and transparency of income and expenditure should be maintained.

Payment Instructions

No information is currently available regarding payment instruction standards for institutional ECs.

National Research Ethics Committee

According to BGD-15 and BGD-16, there is a review and processing fee for Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC) ethical approval via its National Research Ethics Committee (NREC). The fee is based on 2% of the total cost of the approved research project, not exceeding 500,000 Bangladeshi Taka. For clinical trials or drug research, the principal investigator (PI) must pay 50,000 Bangladeshi Taka to the BMRC with the initial submission. However, undergraduate students are required to pay 2,000 Bangladeshi Taka at the time of submission. For amendments and renewals, 50% of the first approval fee will be charged.

No information is currently available regarding BMRC fees for Scientific Review Committee approval.

Payment Instructions

BGD-15 and BGD-16 indicate that the PI must pay the total applicable fee to the BMRC following receipt of ethical approval. The fee is paid by an Account Payee Cheque made out to the “Bangladesh Medical Research Council” at the time the approval letter is received.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

The BGD-GCP states that all institutional ethics committees (ECs) must be registered with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) (Note: ECs are referred to as independent ethics committees (IECs)/institutional review boards (IRBs) in Bangladesh).

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

According to the BGD-GCP, an application for registration of the EC must be submitted to the DGDA’s National Advisory Committee on Human Ethics for IRB/IEC Evaluation. The committee will assess the curriculum vitae (CV), experience, and competence of the EC’s members. Additionally, the committee will evaluate the facilities and subsequently make recommendations to the Director General of the DGDA.

Per the BGD-GCP, committee members are required to annually sign a declaration of conflict of interest. If any committee members are affiliated with any EC, they must abstain from participating in access, voting, or inspection activities related to that particular EC. The committee has the authority to co-opt one (1) or more members if necessary. The DGDA also has the authority to cancel or suspend an EC’s approval if it fails to adhere to the BGD-GCP.

The BGD-GCP indicates that the DGDA will approve and oversee the activities of the EC, with renewal required every 2 (two) years. Additionally, the DGDA will charge fees for the EC registration application and pay reasonable per diem to the members of the National Advisory Committee for attending evaluation meetings.

See Annexure 5 of the BGD-GCP and BGD-17 for a list of documents required for EC registration approval.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

As per the BGD-GCP, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) is responsible for reviewing, evaluating, and approving clinical trial applications for drugs in Bangladesh. The BGD-GCP and BGD-22 indicate that ethical clearance by an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) is a required element of a clinical trial application to the DGDA. Therefore, DGDA review and ethics review may not be conducted in parallel. (Note: According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) is registered with the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) as an official IRB.)

In addition, as delineated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, any health research to be conducted in Bangladesh must be registered with the BMRC, and scientific validity should be approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee before submission of a research project to the BMRC’s NREC. An applicant must obtain ethics approval from the NREC.

However, per BGD-7, the DGDA requires review and approval by an institution’s/organization’s EC for all clinical trials involving humans. Clinical trials that obtain ethical approval from certain well-established ECs do not require NREC approval.

Regulatory Submission

As per the BGD-GCP, the principal investigator (PI) or contract research organization (CRO) must submit the application for permission to conduct a clinical trial to the DGDA.

As per BGD-22, the application to conduct a clinical trial must be submitted on the organization’s official letterhead to:

The Director General
Directorate General of Drug Administration
Mohakhali, Dhaka-1212, Bangladesh

There is no specified language requirement for all the documents to be submitted to the DGDA.

See Annexure-4 of BGD-22 for the clinical protocol amendment application format.

Ethics Review Submission

BGD-16 indicates that all research projects seeking ethical approval should be submitted to the NREC in the prescribed application form (see Annexure A of BGD-15 or BGD-16). All relevant documents should be enclosed with the application form. The proposal, formal application, and relevant documents must be duly signed by the PI and co-investigators/collaborators, and then should be forwarded to the NREC members/secretary.

According to BGD-15 and BGD-16, an application for NREC approval of a clinical trial must be submitted to:

Bangladesh Medical Research Council
Mohakhali, Dhaka-1212, Bangladesh

BGD-15 and BGD-16 further state that four (4) copies of all documents must be submitted to the BMRC. A soft copy on a CD must also be submitted, and all documents should be submitted in an A-4 size data bank file/folder.

There is no specified language requirement for all the documents to be submitted to the BMRC. However, BGD-15 and BGD-16 indicate that the informed consent form, as well as the questionnaire or interview schedule, must be provided in both Bengali and English.

No information is currently available regarding general institutional EC submission process standards or Scientific Review Committee submission process requirements. Each institutional EC has its own required submission procedures, which can differ significantly regarding the application format and number of copies. See BGD-10 and BGD-11 for an example of an institutional EC’s guidelines for students and teachers, respectively.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

As per BGD-22, the following documentation must be submitted to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) to conduct a clinical trial:

Detailed description of Clinical Research Protocol Checklist (see BGD-22)
Ethical clearance for conducting the clinical trial from the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh)
Investigator’s Brochure (IB)
Informed consent form (ICF)
Signed agreements between the sponsor, contract research organization (CRO), trial center, and/or principal investigator (Pl)
Curriculum vitae(s) (CV(s)) of PI and associates
Good manufacturing practice (GMP) certificate of investigational product (IP)
Certificate of Analysis of IP
Details on funding of the trials
Case record form (CRF)
Standard operating procedures (SOPs) of different activities
Good clinical practice (GCP) training certificate of PI and team members
See Annexure-4 of BGD-22 for the clinical protocol amendment application format.

Ethics Committee Requirements

Institutional Ethics Committee

Per the BGD-GCP, the EC should review the following documents:

Trial protocol(s)/amendment(s)
Written ICF(s) and consent form updates that the investigator proposes for use in the trial
Participant recruitment procedures and written information to be provided to participants
IB
Available safety information
Information about payments and compensation available to participants
The investigator's current CV and/or other documentation evidencing qualifications, and any other documents that the EC may need to fulfill its responsibilities
For the BMRC’s guidance for institutional ECs regarding submission format, see Annexure C of the IRB-Manual.

National Research Ethics Committee

BGD-15 and BGD-16 indicate that the following documents must be submitted to the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC) for ethical approval:

PI cover letter to Director for ethical clearance
Completed Ethical Clearance Application Form (Annexure A of BGD-15 and BGD-16)
Signature of PI(s) and co-investigator(s) with detailed addresses (Annexure A of BGD-15 and BGD-16)
Abstract for National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) (Annexure B of BGD-15 and BGD-16)
BMRC format for submission of a research proposal for ethical approval (Annexure C of BGD-15 and BGD-16)
Informed consent form (both Bengali and English) from participant(s) or legal representative/guardian (Annexure D of BGD-15 and BGD-16)
Questionnaire or interview schedule (both Bengali and English)
Procedure for maintaining confidentiality
Budget (Annexure E of BGD-15 and BGD-16)
Copy of approval from valid scientific review committee (if any)
Four (4) copies of all documents and a soft copy in CD format to be submitted to the BMRC (all documents should be submitted in an A-4 size data bank file/folder)
Review and processing fee (RPF) for ethical approval
No information is currently available regarding Scientific Review Committee submission content requirements.

Clinical Protocol

According to the BGD-GCP, BGD-22, and BGD-24, the clinical research protocol should include the following information (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

General information (name and address of the sponsor and monitor, etc.)
Background information
Trial objectives and purpose
Trial design
Selection and withdrawal of participants
Treatment of participants
Assessment of efficacy
Assessment of safety
Procedures for evaluating an adverse event
Statistics
Direct access to source data/documents
Quality control and quality assurance
Ethical considerations
Data handling and record keeping
Financing and insurance
Publication policy
Supplements
The BGD-GCP, BGD-22, and BGD-24 further state that since the protocol and the clinical trial/study report are closely related, further relevant information can be found in the International Council for Harmonisation’s (ICH) Guideline for Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (BGD-31). See the BGD-GCP, BGD-31, BGD-22, and BGD-24 for more detailed requirements.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

The BGD-GCP and BGD-22 indicate that ethical clearance by an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) is a required element of a clinical trial application to the Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA). Therefore, DGDA review and ethics review may not be conducted in parallel. (Note: According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) is registered with the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) as an official IRB.)

In addition, as delineated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, scientific validity should be approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee before submission of a research project to the NREC.

Regulatory Authority Approval

The BGD-GCP and BGD-22 state that the clinical trial protocol should be approved by the DGDA within 60 working days. However, the BGD-GCP further specifies that the 60 working day timeline only applies if there are no observations.

BGD-22 indicates that DGDA Clinical Trial Cell members will screen protocol submissions within five (5) days. If a deficiency is found, the DGDA Clinical Trial Cell will issue a deficiency letter to the applicant within seven (7) days. After the Clinical Trial Advisory Committee decides to disapprove the protocol or recommend it for approval, the disapproval letter or final approval, respectively, will be issued within seven (7) days.

Per the BGD-GCP and BGD-22, for fast-track clinical trial protocols, approval should be granted within 15 working days, and for clinical trial protocol amendments, approval should be obtained within 30 working days. For detailed information on these timelines, see BGD-22 for the clinical trial approval, amendment, and fast track flowcharts.

Ethics Committee Approval

The BGD-GCP states that an EC should review a proposed clinical trial within a reasonable time.

As delineated in BGD-16, NREC expedited review may be granted when the research proposal is approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee as methodologically sound without any intervention and risk of distress or injury, physical or psychological, to the participants. The expedited proposal, along with justification for expedition, is presented to the NREC at its next meeting.

According to BGD-16, research proposals submitted to the NREC from university, medical college, or institution undergraduate students with a recommendation from the head of the institution or institutional EC approval may be given an exemption from peer review. The exemption may be given if there is no intervention and risk of distress or injury, physical or psychological, to the participants. The NREC Chairman may give ethical approval of the proposal on the condition that the proposal must be submitted in the next NREC meeting.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

The G-BGD-IP states that the sponsor may not start a clinical trial until authorization has been granted for the trial; all conditions of the authorization have been met; an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) favorable opinion has been granted; and each trial site has been approved. (Note: According to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) is registered with the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) as an official IRB.)

As per the BGD-GCP, the principal investigator (PI) or contract research organization (CRO) must submit an application to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) for permission to conduct a clinical trial in Bangladesh.

Clinical trials must be conducted in accordance with the good clinical practice (GCP) requirements in the BGD-GCP, which was derived from the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BGD-29) and other international guidance material.

As delineated in the G-BMRC and BGD-16, in addition to obtaining the DGDA’s permission to conduct research in Bangladesh, an applicant must obtain ethics approval from the NREC. Furthermore, scientific validity should be approved by a valid Scientific Review Committee before submission of a research project to the NREC. However, per BGD-7, the DGDA requires review and approval by an institution’s/organization’s EC for all clinical trials involving humans. Clinical trials that obtain ethical approval from certain well-established ECs do not require NREC approval.

Clinical Trial Agreement

The BGD-GCP states that before the commencement of the clinical trial, an agreement must be signed by the involved parties. This may include an agreement between the investigator/institution, sponsor, and CRO; the sponsor and CRO; and/or the investigator/institution and relevant authority(ies) (where required).

The BGD-GCP further specifies that the sponsor should obtain the investigator's/institution's agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with GCP, the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and given approval/favorable opinion by the EC
Comply with procedures for data recording/reporting
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain the trial-related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution these documents are no longer needed
As per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement. In addition, the financial aspects of the trial should be documented in an agreement between the sponsor and the investigator/institution. The sponsor should also ensure that it is specified in the protocol or other written agreement that the investigator(s)/institution(s) provide direct access to source data/documents for trial-related monitoring, audits, EC review, and regulatory inspection.

Clinical Trial Registration

The G-BMRC and BGD-16 indicate that any health research to be conducted in Bangladesh must be registered with the BMRC. The BMRC has developed a form for the registration of research studies and is in the process of developing an electronic submission system for registration. Clinical trials should be registered in the BMRC’s Clinical Trial Registry. According to the G-BMRC, the Clinical Trial Registry will be available through the BMRC website when it is completed. No additional information is available regarding the BMRC's Clinical Trial Registry or its timeline for implementation. Contact the BMRC for more information regarding the registration process. See the Regulatory Authority section for general BMRC contact information.

See BGD-19 for DGDA lists of approved, amended, extended, suspended, and canceled clinical trial protocols in Bangladesh, along with other clinical trial resources.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

As per the BGD-GCP, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Bangladesh’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical investigation participant who is administered an investigational product (IP) that does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – All noxious and unintended responses to a medicinal product related to any dose
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)/Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life-threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or prolonged existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction – An adverse reaction, the nature or severity of which is not consistent with the applicable product information (e.g., Investigator’s Brochure (IB) for an unapproved IP)
Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

The BGD-GCP states that the principal investigator (PI) should report all detected SAEs within two (2) working days to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA), the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh), the data and safety monitoring board (DSMB), and the sponsor. The immediate reports should be followed within seven (7) days by detailed, written reports. The immediate and follow-up reports should identify participants by unique code numbers assigned to the participants rather than by the participants’ names, personal identification numbers, and/or addresses. Additionally, the investigator must report unexpected SADRs to the DGDA and the EC within seven (7) working days. The PI (or the sponsor) should submit to the regulatory authority(ies) all safety updates, as required by applicable regulatory requirement(s).

As per the BGD-GCP, AEs and/or laboratory abnormalities identified in the protocol as critical to safety evaluations should be reported to the sponsor according to the reporting requirements and within the time periods specified by the sponsor in the protocol. For reported deaths, the investigator should supply the sponsor and the EC with any additional requested information (e.g., autopsy reports and terminal medical reports).

However, the G-BMRC delineates that the investigator should report unexpected AEs/ADRs and all SAEs to the sponsor within 24 hours and to the EC that approved the study protocol within seven (7) days. In the event of death, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) should also be informed within 24 hours. The G-BMRC and BGD-16 state that the PI should report SAEs and AEs to the NREC.

In addition, BGD-24 states that when an AE is identified, the PI or their designee must document the AE in the case report form (CRF) and the appropriate toxicity grade from the study-assigned toxicity grading scale. An initial report of the SAE must be transmitted through email to the DGDA, as well as to the sponsor and EC, within 24 hours, and AEs should be communicated within 72 hours. The PI must review all AEs, assessing causality and the required course of action in accordance with the protocol and regulations.

Sponsor Responsibilities

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should promptly notify all concerned investigator(s)/institution(s) and the regulatory authority(ies) of findings that could affect adversely the safety of participants, impact the conduct of the trial, or alter the EC’s approval/favorable opinion to continue the trial. The sponsor should expedite the reporting to all concerned investigator(s)/institutions(s), the EC(s) (where required), and the regulatory authority(ies) of all ADRs that are both serious and unexpected. An initial report of the SAE must be transmitted within 15 calendar days and should be submitted within 30 calendar days. The sponsor (or the PI) should submit to the regulatory authority(ies) all safety updates, as required by applicable regulatory requirement(s).

The G-BMRC indicates that any unexpected SAE that occurs during a clinical trial should be communicated by the sponsor promptly within 14 calendar days to the licensing authority and to the investigator(s) of other trial sites participating in the study. This is so the regulatory authority can immediately stop the clinical trials of unapproved drugs or withdraw from market approved drugs based on a report of Phase IV studies. All other SADRs that are not fatal, or life threatening must be filed as soon as possible but not later than 14 calendar days. At the end of the trial, all AEs, whether related to the trial or not, must be listed, evaluated, and discussed in detail in the final report.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

BGD-24 states that the PI or their designee should report to the DGDA through the Adverse Event Reporting Form During Clinical Trial Study, which is available in BGD-24. An initial report of any SAE must be transmitted through email to the DGDA, as well as to the sponsor and EC, within 24 hours, and AEs should be communicated within 72 hours. The PI must also send a casualty assessment report completed by the EC to the DGDA.

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor’s expedited reports regarding ADRs that are both serious and unexpected should comply with the applicable regulatory requirement(s) and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (BGD-32).

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

As per the BGD-GCP, the investigator should submit written summaries of the trial status every six (6) months to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) and the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh), or more frequently, if requested by the DGDA and the EC. The investigator should promptly provide written reports to the sponsor, the EC, and the institution (where applicable) on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to participants.

BGD-16 indicates that reports should be submitted periodically at intervals prescribed by the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) for review.

Final Report

The BGD-GCP delineates that upon completion of the trial, the investigator, where applicable, should inform the institution. The investigator/institution should provide the EC with a summary of the trial’s outcome, and the DGDA with any required reports. Whether the trial is completed or prematurely terminated, the sponsor should ensure that the clinical trial reports are prepared and provided to the regulatory authority(ies).

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor may refer to the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (BGD-31) for further guidance.

As per BGD-16, a report should be submitted to the NREC at the end of the study.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
As defined in the BGD-GCP, the sponsor is an individual, company, institution, or organization which takes responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a clinical trial. The sponsor is also responsible for the ongoing safety evaluation of the investigational product(s) (IP(s)). According to the G-BMRC, research may be undertaken with assistance from international organizations as sponsors.

The BGD-GCP states that prior to initiating a trial, the sponsor should define, establish, and allocate all trial-related duties and functions. The sponsor may transfer any or all of the sponsor’s trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO), but the ultimate responsibility for the quality and integrity of the trial data always resides with the sponsor. The CRO should implement quality assurance and quality control. The CRO must obtain approval from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) to conduct a clinical trial, with the renewal of approval required every two (2) years. Any trial-related duties and functions that are transferred to and assumed by a CRO should be specified in writing, and any trial-related duties and functions not specifically transferred to and assumed by a CRO are retained by the sponsor.

See BGD-24 for the Requirements for CRO/Clinical Trial Centre form.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

As per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s)/institution(s) for a clinical trial in Bangladesh. Each investigator should be qualified by training (including approved good clinical practice (GCP) training) and experience and have adequate resources to properly conduct the trial for which the investigator is selected. The investigator(s) should also meet all the qualifications specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s) and provide evidence of such qualifications through up-to-date curriculum vitae (CV) and/or other relevant documentation requested by the sponsor, the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh), and/or the Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA).

Additionally, the BGD-GCP indicates that the investigator should be thoroughly familiar with the appropriate use of the investigational product(s) (IP(s)), as described in the protocol, the current Investigator's Brochure (IB), the product information, and other information sources provided by the sponsor. The investigator should be aware of and comply with GCP and applicable regulatory requirements. In addition, the investigator should maintain a list of appropriately qualified persons to whom the investigator has delegated significant trial-related duties.

According to the BGD-GCP, if a coordinating committee and/or coordinating investigator(s) are to be utilized in multicenter trials, their organization and/or selection are the sponsor's responsibilities. Before entering an agreement with an investigator/institution to conduct a trial, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the protocol and an up-to-date IB and provide sufficient time for the investigator/institution to review the protocol and the information provided.

The BGD-GCP further states that the EC should consider the qualifications of the investigator for the proposed trial, as documented by a current CV and/or by any other relevant documentation the EC requests. In addition, the sponsor should designate appropriately qualified medical personnel who will be readily available to advise on trial-related medical questions or problems. If necessary, outside consultant(s) may be appointed for this purpose.

According to BGD-16, a change of investigators and/or place of study must be approved by the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC).

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

No information is currently available regarding foreign sponsor regulatory requirements.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

As per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should utilize appropriately qualified individuals to supervise the overall conduct of the trial, to handle the data, to verify the data, to conduct the statistical analyses, and to prepare the trial reports. The sponsor may consider establishing a data and safety monitoring board (DSMB) (also referred to as an independent data-monitoring committee (IDMC)) to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial. The DSMB should have written operating procedures and maintain written records of all its meetings.

However, according to the G-BMRC and BGD-16, the formation of a DSMB is mandatory for conducting a clinical trial. Per BGD-16, at least two (2) members must be included from the NREC during the formation of the DSMB.

Per the IRB-Manual, the BMRC’s guidance for institutional ECs, the size of the DSMB is determined by the type of trial and the degree of expertise necessary. A DSMB must be made up of at least three (3) members, with an odd number allowing for a definitive decision in case a vote is required. DSMB members often include individuals with scientific knowledge of the disease/participant population under investigation, as well as practical expertise and skill in current clinical trial conduct and technique, and one (1) or more epidemiologist(s) and statistician(s). Items reviewed by the DSMB include:

Interim/cumulative data to look for evidence of adverse events related to the study
If applicable, interim/cumulative data for evidence of efficacy in accordance with pre-established statistical parameters
Data completeness, accuracy, and timeliness
Each trial site’s performance
Factors that could have an impact on the trial's outcome or jeopardize its data confidentiality, such as protocol violations, unmasking, etc.
Multicenter Studies

The BGD-GCP indicates that for multicenter trials, the sponsor should ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and, if required, by the regulatory authority(ies), and given approval/favorable opinion by the EC
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites. For investigators collecting additional data, supplemental CRFs should also be provided that are designed to capture the additional data
The responsibilities of coordinating investigator(s) and the other participating investigators are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards for the assessment of clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication between investigators is facilitated
The G-BMRC further states that in a meaningful multicenter trial, all study sites should be conducted in the same way and follow standardized procedures and evaluation criteria. Meetings should be arranged at the initial and intermediary stages of the trial to ensure consistent procedures at all centers. For recruitment, evaluation/monitoring of laboratory procedures, and conduct of trial, standardization of methods should be carried out. If necessary, the protocol should include monitoring of protocol adherence including measures to terminate the participation of some centers. For this purpose, a central monitoring committee could be set up including EC members. In addition, the specific role of coordinators and monitors should be defined, and centralized data management and analysis should be planned.

According to the G-BMRC, a drafting procedure for common final report and publication should be decided at the outset of the trial. No individual center should publish any data until appropriate authorities accept the combined report. It is advisable to establish communication between ECs reviewing multicenter studies in Bangladesh to discuss ethical concerns of the trial, preferably under the guidance of the NREC, which is particularly important if any EC does not grant approval for a study at a site for ethical reasons.

As per the BGD-GCP, efficient communication between sponsors and regulatory authorities is strongly encouraged during the planning stage of multiregional clinical trials (MRCTs). The aim is to secure acceptance of a global approach to study design that spans different regulatory regions. MRCTs should get approval from the national regulatory authority of the country where they could be conducted before starting. All sites participating in MRCTs must adhere to applicable quality, ethical, and regulatory standards. Specifically, MRCTs should be conducted in compliance with the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BGD-29) standards in all regions and sites, and sites should be made available for GCP inspections by regulatory authorities. Monitoring plans and other quality checks should be pre-specified and implemented to address potential risks to participant rights, safety, well-being, and the reliability of study results. Centralized and risk-based monitoring can be particularly useful for MRCTs to monitor and mitigate the impact of emerging regional differences, such as trial participant retention or adverse event reporting (per the BGD-29). A timely and accurate flow of information is crucial between the sponsor, the trial management team, and the participating sites. Additionally, the ICH’s General Principles for Planning and Design of Multi-Regional Clinical Trials (E17) (BGD-6) should be followed.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Insurance

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor and investigator/institution may be required to generate and retain an insurance statement to document that compensation to participant(s) for trial-related injury will be available.

The BGD-GCP states that if required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), the sponsor must provide insurance or must indemnify (legal and financial coverage) the investigator/institution against claims arising from the trial, except for claims that arise from malpractice and/or negligence.

According to the G-BMRC, sponsors are advised to obtain adequate insurance against risk to cover compensation.

Compensation

Injury or Death

According to the BGD-GCP, sponsor's policies and procedures should address the costs of treatment of trial participants in the event of trial-related injuries in accordance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s). In addition, when trial participants receive compensation, the method and manner of compensation should comply with applicable regulatory requirement(s).

As per the G-BMRC, it is the right of the participants included in a research study to have compensation from the investigator in case of injury and/or disability caused by participation in the study. Research participants who suffer physical injury as a result of their participation are entitled to such financial or other assistance as would compensate them equitably for any temporary or permanent impairment or disability. In the case of death, their dependents are entitled to compensation. Procedures and provisions for compensation should be mentioned in the research proposal and be reviewed by the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC). The NREC should give guidelines and/or directions for compensation. In addition, the informed consent form (ICF) should include details about compensation procedures and provisions.

Trial Participation

The G-BMRC states that participants may be paid for inconveniences and time spent. They should be reimbursed for expenses incurred in connection with their participation in the research and may also receive free medical services. However, the payments should not be so large or the medical services so extensive as to induce prospective participants to consent to participate in the research against their better judgment. All payments, reimbursements, and medical services to be provided to research participants should be mentioned in the research proposal and approved by an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh).

The BGD-GCP delineates that the EC should review both the amount and method of payment to participants to ensure that neither presents problems of coercion or undue influence on the trial participants. Payments to a participant should be prorated and not wholly contingent on the completion of the trial by the participant.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance and quality control systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, documented (recorded), and reported in compliance with the protocol, good clinical practice (GCP), and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for securing agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial-related sites, source data/documents, and reports for monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. Quality control should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been processed correctly.

Monitoring Requirements

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should ensure that the trials are adequately monitored, and determine the appropriate extent and nature of monitoring. The determination of the extent and nature of monitoring should be based on considerations such as the objective, purpose, design, complexity, blinding, size, and endpoints of the trial. Monitors, which are appointed by the sponsor, should be appropriately trained, and have the scientific and/or clinical knowledge needed to monitor the trial adequately. A monitor’s qualifications should be documented. In addition, if or when sponsors perform audits as part of implementing quality assurance, they should consider the purpose of the audit, the selection and qualification of auditors, and the auditing procedures.

The BGD-GCP delineates that noncompliance with the protocol, SOPs, GCP, and/or applicable regulatory requirement(s) by an investigator/institution or member(s) of the sponsor’s staff should lead to prompt action by the sponsor to secure compliance. If the monitoring and/or auditing identify serious and/or persistent noncompliance on the part of an investigator/institution, the sponsor should terminate the investigator’s/ institution’s participation in the trial. When an investigator’s/institution’s participation is terminated because of noncompliance, the sponsor should notify the regulatory authority(ies) promptly. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) will enforce the rules and punitive action will be decided by the DGDA.

See the BGD-GCP for more detailed information on monitoring and auditing requirements.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

As per the BGD-GCP, if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor should promptly inform the investigators/institutions and the regulatory authority(ies) of the termination or suspension and the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. The ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor or by the investigator/institution, as specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s).

In addition, the BGD-GCP indicates that if the trial is prematurely terminated or suspended for any reason, the investigator/institution should promptly inform the trial participants, ensure appropriate therapy and follow-up for the participants, and, where required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), inform the regulatory authority(ies). If the investigator terminates or suspends a trial without the prior agreement of the sponsor, or if the sponsor terminates or suspends a trial, the investigator should inform the institution where applicable. The investigator/institution should promptly inform the sponsor and the EC and provide a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension. If the EC terminates or suspends its approval/favorable opinion of a trial, the investigator should inform the institution where applicable and the investigator/institution should promptly notify the sponsor and provide the sponsor with a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension.

The G-BMRC states that the criteria for termination of a trial must be defined in the trial proposal and a plan of interim analysis must be clearly presented. If the test drug is found more effective or less effective than the standard drug on interim analysis, the trial can be discontinued thereafter, and the better drug should be given to patient(s) receiving the less effective drug.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

According to the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should utilize appropriately qualified individuals to supervise the overall conduct of the trial, handle the data, verify the data, conduct the statistical analyses, and prepare the trial reports. When using electronic trial data handling or remote electronic trial data systems, the sponsor should:

Ensure and document that the electronic data processing system(s) conform(s) to the sponsor's established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistent intended performance
Maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) for using these systems
Ensure that the systems are designed to permit data changes in such a way that the data changes are documented and that there is no deletion of entered data
Maintain a security system that prevents unauthorized access to the data, and a list of the individuals who are authorized to make data changes
Maintain adequate backup of the data
Safeguard the blinding, if any
For additional details, see the BGD-GCP.

Records Management

The BGD-GCP states that the sponsor, or other owners of the data, should retain all of the sponsor-specific essential documents pertaining to the trial (see Annexure 2 of the BGD-GCP). The sponsor should retain all sponsor-related essential documents in conformance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s) of the country(ies) where the investigational product (IP) is approved, and/or where the sponsor intends to apply for approval(s). The investigator/institution should also maintain the trial documents as specified in Annexure 2 of the BGD-GCP, and as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s). The investigator/institution should take measures to prevent accidental or premature destruction of these documents.

As per the BGD-GCP, the essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after the last marketing approval or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the IP. These documents should be retained for a longer period, however, if required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s) or if needed by the sponsor. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s)/institution(s) in writing of the need for record retention and should notify the investigator(s)/institution(s) in writing when the trial-related records are no longer needed.

The G-CROMF states that if applicable, a contract research organization (CRO) master file should be submitted to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) if requested. It should be succinct and, if possible, not exceed 25 A4 pages. An updated CRO master file should be submitted when requested by the DGDA, or if significant changes have been implemented by the CRO. See the G-CROMF for more information on the preparation of a CRO master file.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Responsible Parties

No information is currently available.

Data Protection

No information is currently available.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

According to the G-BMRC, participants must be informed of their rights regarding the storage and destruction of data. The G-BMRC also notes that it is good practice to notify all participants regarding the last approximate date it will be possible to withdraw their data (for example, prior to publication). Researchers should consider whether participants’ data will still be useful if they decide to withdraw. If this is the case, participants will need to consent to its use. They can be given the option to withdraw and also have their data withdrawn, or to withdraw but state that they will allow their data to be used. If a focus group is being carried out, it will not be possible to withdraw one (1) participant’s data following the intervention without removing the data for all the participants, because what one (1) participant says will affect the responses from others. It must be made clear on the participant information sheet that it will not be possible to withdraw data in this case.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Bangladeshi clinical trials, a freely given informed consent is required to be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the BGD-GCP and the G-BMRC.

As per the G-BMRC, BGD-15, and BGD-16, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s National Research Ethics Committee (NREC) and provided to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) with the clinical trial application. The BGD-GCP further indicates that the investigator should have the written approval/favorable opinion from an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) of the written informed consent form and any other written information to be provided to participants.

The BGD-GCP states that in obtaining and documenting informed consent, the investigator should comply with good clinical practice (GCP) and to the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki (BGD-33). Neither the investigator, nor the trial staff, should coerce or unduly influence a participant to participate or to continue to participate in a trial. Before informed consent may be obtained, the investigator, or a person designated by the investigator, should provide the participant or the legal representative/guardian ample time and opportunity to inquire about details of the trial and to decide whether or not to participate in the trial. All questions about the trial should be answered to the satisfaction of the participant or the legal representative/guardian.

As per the BGD-GCP, the language used in the oral and written information about the trial, including the written ICF, should be as nontechnical as practical and should be understandable to the participant or the legal representative/guardian and the impartial witness, where applicable. Furthermore, none of the oral and written information concerning the trial, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or the legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive any legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator, the institution, the sponsor, or their agents from liability for negligence.

The G-BMRC further states that to obtain consent, the investigator must provide the participants with the opportunity and encouragement to ask questions. For studies without any intervention involving a large community, the investigator must also have the consent of the community. For more investigator requirements in obtaining consent, see the G-BMRC.

Re-Consent

According to the BGD-GCP, the ICF and any other written information to be provided to participants should be revised whenever important new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s consent. Any revised written ICF and written information should receive the EC's written approval/favorable opinion in advance of use. The participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial. The communication of this information should be documented.

Language Requirements

BGD-15 and BGD-16 indicate that the ICF, as well as the questionnaire or interview schedule, submitted to the BMRC must be provided in both Bengali and English.

As stated in the G-BMRC, the informed consent documentation must be inclusive. If the research involves participants who cannot speak or write English, the documentation needs to be translated (a professional translator needs to be employed unless the investigator is fluent in Bengali). Consideration for people with special needs, for example, dyslexia, will need to be included and the provision for alternative formats of documentation should be made.

Documenting Consent

According to the BGD-GCP, the investigator, or a person designated by the investigator, should fully inform the participant or, if the participant is unable to provide informed consent, the participant’s legal representative/guardian, of all pertinent aspects of the trial including the written information given approval/favorable opinion by the EC. Prior to a participant’s participation in the trial, the written ICF should be signed and personally dated by the participant or the legal representative/guardian, and by the person who conducted the informed consent discussion.

The BGD-GCP further delineates that if a participant is unable to read or if the legal representative/guardian is unable to read, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. After the written ICF and any other written information to be provided to participants is read and explained to the participant or the legal representative/guardian, and after the participant or the legal representative/guardian has orally consented to the participant’s participation in the trial, and, if capable of doing so, has signed and/or thumb printed and personally dated the ICF, the witness should sign and personally date the consent form. Prior to participation in the trial, the participant or the legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated written ICF and any other written information provided to the participants. During a participant’s participation in the trial, the participant or the legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated consent form updates and a copy of any amendments to the written information provided to participants.

Waiver of Consent

Per the BGD-GCP, where the protocol indicates that prior consent of the trial participants or the legal representative/guardian is not possible, the EC should determine that the proposed protocol and/or other document(s) adequately addresses relevant ethical concerns and meets applicable regulatory requirements for such trials (i.e., in emergency situations).

Per the IRB-Manual, the BMRC’s guidance for institutional ECs, individual consent is not required for a government-wide poll. For a non-intervention form of research or survey including an entire community, the community's consent is not required.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
According to the BGD-GCP, the G-BMRC, BGD-15, and BGD-16, the informed consent discussion, the written informed consent form (ICF), and any other written information to be provided to participants should include statements or descriptions of the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The interviewer’s details
That the trial involves research
The research method and purpose of the trial
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
The trial procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The participant’s responsibilities
Those aspects of the trial that are experimental
The measures to be taken to minimize risks
The reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant and, when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
The reasonably expected benefits; when there is no intended clinical benefit to the participant, the participant should be made aware of this
The alternative procedure(s) or course(s) of treatment that may be available to the participant, and their important potential benefits and risks
The compensation and/or treatment available to the participant in the event of trial-related injury
The anticipated prorated compensation, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
The anticipated expenses, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
That the participant’s participation in the trial is voluntary and that the participant may refuse to participate or withdraw from the trial, at any time, without penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled
That the monitor(s), the auditor(s), the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh), and the regulatory authority(ies) will be granted direct access to the participant’s original medical records for verification of clinical trial procedures and/or data, without violating the confidentiality of the participant, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and regulations and that, by signing a written ICF, the participant or legal representative/guardian is authorizing such access
That records identifying the participant will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and/or regulations, will not be made publicly available; the participant’s identity will remain confidential if trial results are published
That the participant or legal representative/guardian will be informed in a timely manner if information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial
The person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
The foreseeable circumstances and/or reasons under which the participant’s participation in the trial may be terminated
The expected duration of the participant’s participation in the trial
The approximate number of participants involved in the trial and criteria for selection of participants
The source of the investigational product (IP) that may be culturally unacceptable
See Annexure 1 of the BGD-GCP for an ICF template. See Annexure A of the IRB-Manual, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s guidance for institutional ECs, for an example of an ICF in both Bengali and English.

Compensation Disclosure

As set forth in the BGD-GCP, the reviewing EC should ensure that information regarding payment to participants, including the methods, amounts, and schedule of payment to trial participants, is set forth in the written ICF and any other written information to be provided to participants. The method of prorating payment should also be specified.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

The BGD-GCP states that in obtaining and documenting informed consent, the investigator should comply with good clinical practice (GCP) and the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki (BGD-33). In accordance with the BGD-GCP, the G-BMRC, BGD-15, and BGD-16, a participant’s rights must be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the BGD-GCP, a participant should be informed that participation is voluntary and that refusal to participate or withdraw from the trial is allowed, without penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

According to the G-BMRC, it is also necessary to make it as easy as possible for people to withdraw, bearing in mind that they might not feel comfortable telling the investigator directly that they no longer wish to participate. Options, such as posting a slip, will need to be included.

The Right to Information

According to the BGD-GCP, the G-BMRC, BGD-15, and BGD-16, a potential research participant or the legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per the BGD-GCP, the G-BMRC, BGD-15, and BGD-16, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right.

The G-BMRC indicates that participants should be told of the limits to the investigators' ability to safeguard confidentiality and of the anticipated consequences of breaches of confidentiality. Degree of importance of confidentiality depends on the nature of the research study. If the research study involves collection of data on sensitive issues, protections of confidentiality become prominent and essential. Limitations of the investigator related to breach of confidentiality and anticipated consequences of breaches of confidentiality should be told to participants.

The G-BMRC further states that it is the duty of the investigator to maintain appropriate confidentiality of research data. The investigator should handle the data in such a way that an individual remains unidentified. The investigator should adopt the following measures to maintain confidentiality:

Code numbers for data
Remove core sheets (containing names and addresses of the participants)
Omitting identifications
Prevent unlimited access to data
Train related manpower in confidentiality
Keep research records in locked cabinets
Provide security codes for computerized records
The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The BGD-GCP state that the ICF should include information on the person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury. As per the G-BMRC, the address of the contact person must also be provided in case of queries.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The G-BMRC indicates that during development of a research proposal, the investigator should consider respect for human dignity and protection of the rights and welfare of participants. The investigators should also be competent enough to safeguard the welfare of the research participants, and the researcher should oversee whether prevailing legal provisions and administrative arrangements ensure that the human rights and welfare of participants involved in health research are adequately considered and protected in conformity with ethical principles.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
The BGD-GCP states that in emergency situations, when prior consent of the participant is not possible, the consent of the legal representative/guardian, if present, should be requested. When prior consent of the participant is not possible, and the legal representative/guardian is not available, the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) should determine that the proposed protocol and/or other document(s) adequately addresses relevant ethical concerns and meets applicable regulatory requirements for such trials. In such instances, enrollment of the participant should require measures described in the protocol and/or elsewhere, with documented approval/favorable opinion by the EC, to protect the rights, safety, and well-being of the participant and to ensure compliance with applicable regulatory requirements. The participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible. Consent to continue and other consent, as appropriate, should be requested.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Overview

According to the BGD-GCP and the G-BMRC, research participants from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process.

As per the BGD-GCP, vulnerable participants include individuals whose willingness to volunteer in a clinical trial may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation, or of a retaliatory response from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate. Examples are members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable participants include patients with incurable diseases, persons in nursing homes, unemployed, illiterate or impoverished persons, and patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.

The G-BMRC indicates that efforts should be made to ensure that individuals or communities invited for research are selected in such a way that the burdens and benefits of the research are equally distributed. Racial equalities should be maintained on genetic research, and economically or socially disadvantaged persons should not be used when there are persons better off than them. Involvement of those who have reduced autonomy as research participants, such as prisoners, students, subordinates, employees, and service personnel, requires adequate justification since the consent provided may be under duress or various other compelling reasons.

The BGD-GCP states that when a non-therapeutic trial is to be carried out with the consent of the participant’s legal representative/guardian, the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) should determine that the proposed protocol and/or other document(s) adequately addresses relevant ethical concerns and meets applicable regulatory requirements for such trials.

See the IRB-Manual for the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s guidance for institutional ECs regarding vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
The G-BMRC defines a child as a person below the age of 18. Consideration should be taken before involving children as study participants. Children should not be involved as participants in research that might be equally carried out in adults, and they should only participate in research to obtain knowledge regarding their health needs.

According to the G-BMRC, participation of children in a clinical evaluation of a new drug trial is permitted only after Phase III clinical trials in adults. If testing the therapeutic value of a drug in a primary disease of children, the study can be carried out earlier. Study design of interventions applied to a child participant for the benefit of diagnostic, preventive, or therapeutic purposes should be justified in relation to anticipated risks involved in the study and anticipated benefits to society. Such interventions should be at least as advantageous as any available alternative interventions. The benefit and risk to the child participant should be determined before intervention, otherwise the benefit will be low when compared to the knowledge that is to be gained. In addition, the study should be well designed to ensure adequate medical and psychological support to the parent and children.

The G-BMRC further indicates that consent should be obtained from the parent/legal guardian of each child before inclusion in the study. The parent/legal guardian is given the opportunity to observe the research as it proceeds to be able to withdraw the child if they decide that it is in the child’s best interest to do so.

Assent Requirements

As per the BGD-GCP, when a clinical trial includes minors, the participant should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with the participant’s understanding and, if capable, the participant should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

The G-BMRC delineates that consent from each child should be taken to the extent of the child’s intelligence and capabilities, such as in the case of mature minors from the age of seven (7) years up to the age of 18 years. Any child at any moment that wants to withdraw and/or refuse to participate in the study, even if the parent/legal guardian has given consent, should be respected unless there is no acceptable alternative medically recognized therapy.

See Annexure B of the IRB-Manual, the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC)’s guidance for institutional ECs, for an example of an assent form in both Bengali and English.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
The G-BMRC states that it is always best to avoid involvement of pregnant or nursing mothers in research except for trials which gather new knowledge on pregnancy, fetuses, and lactation where non-pregnant or non-nursing women are not suitable participants. The research should be well designed in such a way that protects or advances the health of pregnant or nursing women, fetuses, or nursing infants with no more than minimal risk.

According to the G-BMRC, it is mandatory to describe the opportunity and benefits to the women as participants in a study, and deprivation from any opportunity or benefit is unethical. Women should not be encouraged to discontinue nursing without proper assessment where breastfeeding is harmful to the infant, and compensation of supplementary food should be considered. At any time or while participating in research, women who desire to undergo medical termination of pregnancy should follow the applicable laws.

The G-BMRC further indicates that research involving prenatal diagnostic techniques to detect fetal genetic disorders or any abnormalities should follow the relevant World Health Organization (WHO) guideline.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
The G-BMRC indicates that efforts should be made to ensure that individuals or communities invited for research are selected in such a way that the burdens and benefits of the research are equally distributed. Involvement of those who have reduced autonomy as research participants, such as prisoners, requires adequate justification since the consent provided may be under duress or various other compelling reasons.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
According to the BGD-GCP, when a clinical trial includes participants who can only be enrolled in the trial with the consent of the legal representative/guardian (e.g., patients with severe dementia), the participant should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with the participant’s understanding and, if capable, the participant should sign and personally date the written informed consent. In addition, when a non-therapeutic trial is to be carried out with the consent of the participant’s legal representative/guardian, the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) should determine that the proposed protocol and/or other document(s) adequately addresses relevant ethical concerns and meets applicable regulatory requirements for such trials.

The G-BMRC states that the rights and welfare of mentally challenged and mentally differently able persons who are incapable of giving informed consent or those with behavioral disorders must be protected. Appropriate proxy consent from the legal representative/guardian should be taken after the person is well informed about the study, the need for participation, the risks and benefits involved, and the privacy and confidentiality procedures. The entire consent process should be properly documented.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
According to the BGD-GCP and the G-BGD-IP, an investigational product (IP) (also referred to as an investigational medicinal product (IMP) in Bangladesh) is any medicinal product which is being tested within a trial or any product, including placebo, that is being used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes products with marketing authorization when used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a way different from the approved form, when used for an unapproved indication (off-label use), or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Manufacturing

According to the DrugPolicy, the G-BGD-IP, and BGD-8, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of drugs, including investigational products (IPs) (also referred to as investigational medicinal products (IMPs)), in Bangladesh.

The DrugRules states that if the entity proposing to manufacture a drug for the purpose of examination, test, or analysis does not hold an existing license to manufacture drugs in Bangladesh, a Form 17 license (BGD-21) must be obtained before commencing such manufacture. The application for a Form 17 license (BGD-21) must be submitted to the DGDA using Form 18 (BGD-34), and must be made or countersigned by the head of the institution in which, or a director of the firm or company by which, the substance will be manufactured. A Form 17 license (BGD-21) will, unless sooner cancelled, be in force for one (1) year from the date of issue, and may thereafter be renewed one (1) year at a time.

According to the BGD-GCP, the IP(s) must be manufactured in good manufacturing practice (GMP)-compliant facilities. For investigational new drugs (INDs), the sponsor must submit the IND certificate from the national regulatory authority of the country of origin to the DGDA. In this case, the DGDA may consider the IND certificate from the country of origin if the country is a World Health Organization (WHO) Listed Authority (WLA) or a stringent regulatory authority. As per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should ensure that the IP(s) (including active comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable) is characterized as appropriate to the stage of development of the product(s), is manufactured in accordance with any applicable GMP, and is coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable. If required, the DGDA may conduct a GMP inspection of the IP manufacturing site. The DrugsCosAct indicates that if the manufacturer’s pharmacovigilance program is not conducted effectively, the DGDA’s Director General may temporarily suspend or cancel the license of the concerned establishment to manufacture drugs.

The G-BGD-IP further indicates that release of a product is contingent upon providing the GMP certificate, the Certificate of Analysis (CoA), and a data log (See Annexure 2 of the G-BGD-IP). Additionally, IPs manufactured for clinical trials must comply with GMP guidelines from the WHO, the European Union (EU), the Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S), or the United States (US).

Import

According to the G-BGD-IP and the BGD-GCP, the DGDA is responsible for authorizing the import of IPs into Bangladesh. Permission for importing IPs is issued by the DGDA as a no objection certificate (NOC). The G-BGD-IP specifies that in the application for an NOC to import/locally collect IPs, the sponsor/principal investigator (PI) should mention the amount they want to import/collect with the justification (See Annexure 6 of the G-BGD-IP or BGD-18 for the Application Form of Import of IMPs/Placebo, and see Annexure 7 for the Checklist of NOC for IMPs). The DGDA will verify the amount according to the protocol and issue the NOC. The manufacturer providing the IP(s) must also obtain a relevant license/permission from the DGDA. The DGDA has a legal responsibility to ensure that the IP has been manufactured in accordance with GMP and meets the conditions of the clinical trial authorization and the product specification file (PSF) (See Annexure 1 of the G-BGD-IP).

The DrugsCosAct indicates that as with the manufacture license, an import license may be temporarily suspended or canceled by the DGDA Director General if the manufacturer’s pharmacovigilance program is not conducted effectively.

The BGD-GCP states that all importation of clinical trial drugs should go through customs even though a clinical trial import license has been obtained or a NOC has been received from the DGDA. In addition, the G-BGD-IP indicates that shipping of IPs should be conducted according to instructions given by or on behalf of the sponsor in the shipping order.

As per the G-BGD-IP, DGDA officer(s) may inspect the premises of the trial site/sponsor/contract research organization (CRO) facilities to evaluate the following documents:

The CoA of each batch of the IP(s) as well as comparator(s), if relevant
A copy of the letter of approval of clinical trial
A copy of a valid GMP certificate for the IP issued by the competent regulatory authority in the country of origin
The cover sheet should be completed by the sponsor and accompany each consignment of IPs (See Annexure 4 of the G-BGD-IP or BGD-18)
Please note: Bangladesh is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (BGD-2), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see BGD-4.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

As per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor is generally responsible for ensuring that an up-to date Investigator’s Brochure (IB) is made available to the investigator(s), and the investigators are responsible for providing the up-to date IB to the responsible ethics committees (ECs) (referred to as independent ethics committees (IECs)/institutional review boards (IRBs) in Bangladesh). The sponsor should provide the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the protocol and an up-to-date IB before entering an agreement with an investigator/institution to conduct a trial. In the case of an investigator sponsored trial, the sponsor-investigator should determine whether a brochure is available from the commercial manufacturer. If the investigational product (IP) (also referred to as an investigational medicinal product (IMP) in Bangladesh) is provided by the sponsor-investigator, then the sponsor-investigator should provide the necessary information to the trial personnel. In cases where preparation of a formal IB is impractical, the sponsor-investigator should provide, as a substitute, an expanded background information section in the trial protocol that contains the minimum current information described in the BGD-GCP.

The BGD-GCP indicates that when planning trials, the sponsor should ensure that sufficient safety and efficacy data from nonclinical studies and/or clinical trials are available to support human exposure by the route, at the dosages, for the duration, and in the trial population to be studied. According to the BGD-GCP and the G-BGD-IP, the sponsor should update the IB as significant new information becomes available.

As per the BGD-GCP, the IB is a compilation of the clinical and nonclinical data on the IP(s) that are relevant to the study of the product(s) in human participants. Its purpose is to provide the investigators and others involved in the trial with the information to facilitate their understanding of the rationale for, and their compliance with, many key features of the protocol, such as the dose, dose frequency/interval, methods of administration, and safety monitoring procedures. The IB should include:

Title page
Confidentiality statement
Table of contents
Summary
Introduction
Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation
Information on nonclinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and product metabolism in animals, toxicology)
Information on effects in humans (pharmacokinetics and product metabolism; safety and efficacy; marketing experience)
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator
See the BGD-GCP for detailed content guidelines.

Quality Management

The G-BGD-IP states that the sponsor or principal investigator (PI) should submit to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) the good manufacturing practice (GMP) certificate of the manufacturing plant from the national regulatory authority of the country of origin. IPs should be produced in accordance with the principles and guidelines of GMP for medical products. Production processes for IPs are not expected to be validated to the extent necessary for routine production, but premises and equipment are expected to be qualified.

The G-BGD-IP further indicates that release of a product is contingent upon providing the GMP certificate, the Certificate of Analysis (CoA), and a data log (See Annexure 2 of the G-BGD-IP). IPs manufactured for clinical trials must comply with GMP guidelines from the World Health Organization (WHO), the European Union (EU), the Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S), or the United States (US).

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Labeling for investigational products (IPs) (also referred to as investigational medicinal products (IMPs) in Bangladesh) must comply with the requirements set forth in the BGD-GCP and the G-BGD-IP. The BGD-GCP indicates that the sponsor should ensure that the IP(s) (including active comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable) is coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable. In blinded trials, the coding system for the IP(s) should include a mechanism that permits rapid identification of the product(s) in case of a medical emergency but does not permit undetectable breaks of the blinding.

According to the G-BGD-IP, labeling should comply with the requirements of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA). The following information should be included on labels, unless its absence can be justified:

The name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor, contract research organization (CRO), or investigator (the main contact for information on the IP, clinical trial, and emergency unblinding)
The pharmaceutical dosage form, route of administration, quantity of dosage units, and in the case of open trials, name/identifier and strength/potency
The batch and/or code number to identify the contents and packaging operation
A trial reference code allowing identification of the trial, site, investigator, and sponsor, if not given elsewhere
The trial participant identification number or treatment number and, where relevant, the visit number
The investigator’s name (if not already provided on the label)
The directions for use (reference may be made to a leaflet or other explanatory document intended for the trial subject or person administering the product)
“For Clinical Trial Use Only” or similar wording
The storage conditions
The period of use (use-by date, expiration date, or re-test date, as applicable), in month/year format and in a manner that avoids any ambiguity
"Keep Out of Reach of Children" except when the product is for use in trials where the product is not taken home by participants
For additional detailed labelling information, see the G-BGD-IP.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

The BGD-GCP indicates that the sponsor should not supply an investigator/institution with the investigational products(s) (IP(s)) (also referred to as investigational medicinal products (IMPs) in Bangladesh) until the sponsor obtains all required documentation, such as a favorable opinion from an ethics committee (EC) (referred to as independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh) and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA). The G-BGD-IP further states that the IPs should remain under the control of the sponsor.

According to the BGD-GCP and the G-BGD-IP, the sponsor is responsible for supplying the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the IP(s) and should ensure timely delivery of IP(s) to the investigator(s). Per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should:

Take steps to ensure that the IP(s) are stable over the period of use
Maintain sufficient quantities of the IP(s) used in the trials to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary, and maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics. To the extent stability permits, samples should be retained either until the analyses of the trial data are complete or as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), whichever represents the longer retention period
The G-BGD-IP indicates that the packaging must ensure the IP remains in good condition during transport and storage at intermediate destinations. Any opening or tampering of the outer packaging during transport should be readily discernible. The BGD-GCP further states that the IP(s) should be packaged to prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage.

The BGD-GCP further indicates that the sponsor should determine, for the IP(s), acceptable storage temperatures, storage conditions (e.g., protection from light), storage times, reconstitution fluids and procedures, and devices for product infusion, if any. The sponsor should inform all involved parties (e.g., monitors, investigators, pharmacists, storage managers) of these determinations. As per the BGD-GCP and the G-BGD-IP, the sponsor should also ensure that written procedures include instructions that the investigator/institution should follow for the handling and storage of IP(s) for the trial and documentation thereof. The procedures should address adequate and safe receipt, handling, storage, dispensing, and retrieval of unused product from participants, and return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor (or alternative disposition if authorized by the sponsor and in compliance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s)).

The G-BGD-IP states that all IPs used and unused must be accounted for by the study monitor/sponsor. Disposal of used or unused IPs must be initiated only after the written instruction from the sponsor/study monitor has been obtained. After finishing the trial, the sponsor/principal investigator must inform the DGDA about the remaining and used amount of IPs using the form in Annexure 5 of the G-BGD-IP.

For more information on the destruction of IPs or the return of IPs to the sponsor, see the G-BGD-IP.

Record Requirements

Per the BGD-GCP, the sponsor should:

Maintain records that document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP(s)
Maintain a system for retrieving IPs and documenting this retrieval (e.g., for deficient product recall, reclaim after trial completion, expired product reclaim)
Maintain a system for the disposition of unused IP(s) and for the documentation of this disposition.
The G-BGD-IP delineates that IP records must be maintained to demonstrate adherence to the trial protocol and credibility and integrity of the data. The BGD-GCP further indicates that the investigator/institution and/or a pharmacist, or other appropriate individual who is designated by the investigator/institution, should maintain records of the IP's delivery to the trial site, the inventory at the site, the use by each participant, and the return to the sponsor or alternative disposition of unused product(s). These records should include dates, quantities, batch/serial numbers, expiration dates (if applicable), and the unique code numbers assigned to the IP(s) and trial participants. Investigators should maintain records that document adequately that the participants were provided the doses specified by the protocol and reconcile all IP(s) received from the sponsor.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
As per the G-BMRC, human biological samples include whole or part of organs, tissues, cells (somatic and gonadal), bodily fluids or samples like serum, buffy coat, DNA, hair, nails, excreta, sweat, buccal scrapings, etc.

The G-BMRC also defines identified specimens as those linked to personal information in such a way that the person from whom the material was obtained could be identified by name, patient number, or clear pedigree location (e.g., the person’s relationship to a family member whose identity is known). Unidentified specimens are those for which identifiable personal information was not collected or, if collected, was not maintained and cannot be retrieved by the repository.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
Import

The G-BMRC indicates that the import of biological materials for research and development should be regulated by the Government of Bangladesh. Clinical trials using cells after major manipulation or those sponsored by multinational entities involving stem cell products imported from abroad require prior approval of the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC) and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW).

Export

According to the G-BMRC, ethical issues exist pertaining to consent requirements for the banking and further uses of tissue and DNA samples, their control and ownership, and the benefit sharing to the individual or community. Permission must be obtained for shipping repository samples abroad.

Material Transfer Agreement

The G-BMRC states that when using repository research samples, there should be appropriate material transfer agreements (MTAs) with the repository for depositing samples as well as for taking them out with clear reasons. Third parties must be allowed to take samples only after approval from the BMRC’s repository ethics committee.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 9, 2025
According to the G-BMRC, the sample collector must obtain informed consent from the donor for DNA banking or for cell-line transformation and banking. The process of seeking informed consent for purposes of banking must clearly be stated in addition to possible risks and benefits, the conditions under which samples from the repository will be provided to other researchers, how long and in what condition the samples will be preserved in the repository, and what the costs to individual researchers will be in obtaining samples from the repository. The sample collector must also clearly inform all donors that they reserve the right to order destruction of their samples from the repository at any time. To prevent any exploitation and protect the rights of participants, the main requirements at collection level are:

Individual informed consent
Approval of the ethics committee (EC) (referred to as independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB) in Bangladesh)
Approval of the Repository Ethics Committee (which may be formed by the Bangladesh Medical Research Council (BMRC))
For more information on using repository samples, see the G-BMRC.

Requirements
(Legislation) Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 2023 (DrugsCosAct – Bengali) (English-DrugsCosAct – Unofficial Translation) (September 18, 2023)
Bangladesh National Parliament
(Regulation) The Bengal Drug Rules, 1946 (DrugRules) (As amended up to December 1952)
Government of East Bengal
(Guidance) Ethical Guidelines for Conducting Research Studies Involving Human Subjects (G-BMRC) (Date Unavailable)
Bangladesh Medical Research Council
(Guidance) Guidance on Clinical Trial Inspection (G-CTInspect) (July 3, 2018)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for GMP, Import, Export, and Destruction of Investigational Medical Products (IMPs) for Clinical Trials Bangladesh (G-BGD-IP) (Version 01) (Effective December 2021)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products Bangladesh (BGD-GCP) (Version 02) (Effective December 2023)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Registration of Human Vaccines (G-BGD-Vaccine) (Version 01) (Effective March 30, 2022)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Regulatory Approvals of Stem Cell and Cell Based Products (SCCPs) (G-SCCPs) (Date Unavailable)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Preparation of a Contract Research Organization Master File Bangladesh (G-CROMF) (July 5, 2018)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Guidance) Manual on Institutional Review Boards (IRB-Manual) (Date Unavailable)
Bangladesh Medical Research Council and World Health Organization
(Policy) National Drug Policy, 2016 (DrugPolicy - Bengali) (English-DrugPolicy - Unofficial Translation) (March 23, 2018)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Resolution) Resolution No. ME-11/3.4/76/371. (BMRC-Res) (August 31, 1976)
Ministry of Health, Labour and Social Welfare
Additional Resources
(Document) Annexure of Clinical Trial SOP (BGD-24) (Date Unavailable)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Document) Application Format for Clinical Trial Protocol Approval (BGD-22) (Date Unavailable)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Document) Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) – Organogram (BGD-9 – Bengali) (Last Updated February 12, 2025)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Document) Documents to be Submitted for Ethical Approval (BGD-15) (2021)
Bangladesh Medical Research Council
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (BGD-2) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for Ethical Approval (BGD-16) (2021)
National Research Ethics Committee, Bangladesh Medical Research Council
(International Guidance) Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (BGD-32) (Step 4 Version) (October 27, 1994)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (BGD-33) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Guideline: General Principles for Planning and Design of Multi-Regional Clinical Trials (E17) (BGD-6) (Final Version) (November 16, 2017)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (BGD-31) (Step 4 Version) (November 30, 1995)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BGD-29) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with icddr,b (June 2024) (BGD-7)
(Webpage) Bangladesh Medical Research Council – Contact (BGD-30) (Current as of October 9, 2025)
Bangladesh Medical Research Council
(Webpage) Bangladesh Medical Research Council – Functions (BGD-36) (Current as of October 9, 2025)
Bangladesh Medical Research Council
(Webpage) Country Profile: Bangladesh (BGD-4) (Current as of October 9, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) – Clinical Trial Guidelines and Forms (BGD-14 – Bengali) (Last Updated March 12, 2025)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Webpage) Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) – History (BGD-8 – Bengali) (Last Updated February 13, 2025)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Webpage) Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) – List of Clinical Trials (BGD-19 – Bengali) (Last Updated May 24, 2025)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Webpage) Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) – Map (BGD-28 – English and Bengali) (Last Updated March 4, 2021)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Webpage) Directorate General of Drug Administration (DGDA) (Old Site) (BGD-13) (Last Updated September 7, 2025)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
Forms
(Form) Application for Institutional Review Board (I.R.B) Clearance - Student (BGD-10) (Date Unavailable)
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University
(Form) Application for Institutional Review Board (I.R.B) Clearance - Teacher (BGD-11) (Date Unavailable)
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University
(Form) Application for Licence to Manufacture Drugs for the Purpose of Examination, Test or Analysis (Form 18) (BGD-34) (Last Updated September 11, 2015)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Form) Licence to Manufacture Drugs for the Purpose of Research (Form 17) (BGD-21) (Last Updated September 11, 2015)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Form) List of Documents Required for IRB/IEC Approval from DGDA (BGD-17) (Date Unavailable)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
(Form) Required Documents for NOC for Investigational Medicinal Products (IMPs) (BGD-18) (June 19, 2024)
Directorate General of Drug Administration
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map




Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Brazil
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
This message was updated on January 13, 2026
Information Not Yet Incorporated Into Country Profile:

RDC No. 945/2024 and IN No. 338/2024 Q&A Document

On December 26, 2025, the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) published a Questions and Answers document providing clarification regarding RDC No. 945/2024 and IN No. 338/2024. For more details, see the ANVISA announcement. (Google Translation of Q&A document)

ANVISA Resolution about Application Priority Classification

On December 16, 2025, ANVISA published RDC No. 1,001 of December 11, 2025, which outlines the priority classification of applications for registration, post-registration, prior approval for clinical trials, and good manufacturing practice (GMP) certification for medicines and active pharmaceutical ingredients. This resolution goes into effect on January 15, 2026, and revokes RDC No. 204/2017. For more details, see the resolution.

ANVISA Resolution Establishing Optimized Reliance Review Queue

On November 11, 2025, ANVISA published RDC 997/2025, which states that primary and secondary clinical research petitions for medicines and biological products that meet the criteria for applying the optimized Reliance review procedure under RDC 945/2024 and IN 338/2024 will be allocated to a specific queue. Petitions will be analyzed in the order in which the inclusion request for procedures optimized by Reliance is received, by specific subject code. However, petitions that are already prioritized under RDC 204/2017 or RDC 205/2017 will have priority over others in the queue. Furthermore, ANVISA’s General Management of Medicines (GGMED) has established five sub-queues that align with the subject codes. For more information, see the ANVISA announcement and the Frequently Asked Questions. Additionally, for details on the list of abandoned and replaced processes according to the rules of RDC 997/2025, see this ANVISA article.

New Regulation Issued for 2024 Clinical Research Law

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating Law No. 14,874, of May 28, 2024. The Decree outlines the composition and responsibilities of the National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings; establishes a new research platform which will replace Plataforma Brasil; details the research ethics committee (CEP) accreditation process based on research risk; outlines the prioritization of research that is of strategic interest to the Unified Health System (SUS); provides requirements for the protection of research participants; details the regulation of biobanks and biorepositories; and provides transitional provisions, including that the National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) system will continue until the new National Research Ethics Body is operational. For more information, see the Ministry of Health announcement.

Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)

As delineated in ResNo945 and ResNo705 (amending ResNo585), the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial oversight, approval, and inspection of drugs to be registered in Brazil. ANVISA grants permission for clinical trials to be conducted in accordance with the provisions of ResNo945 and ResNo705 (amending ResNo585).

LawNo9.782 states ANVISA is an independent administrative agency linked to the Ministry of Health (MOH) that is responsible for regulating, controlling, and supervising products and services involving public health risks. LawNo9.782 and ResNo585 explain that the goods and products under the agency’s purview include medicines for human use and their active ingredients; immunobiologicals and their active substances, and blood and blood products, and; advanced therapy products and their active components, and other inputs, processes, and technologies.

As indicated in LawNo9.782 and ResNo585, ANVISA is headed by a Collegiate Board of Directors which is responsible for defining ANVISA’s strategic management plans, ensuring compliance with and enforcing regulatory acts relating to health surveillance, and proposing governmental policies and guidelines to the Minister in support of the agency’s objectives.

Additionally, as delineated in ResNo705 and ResNo800 (amending ResNo585), with respect to active pharmaceutical ingredients and medicines, the General Management of Medicines (Gerência-Geral de Medicamentos (GGMED)), which operates within ANVISA’s Collegiate Board, coordinates and supervises the organizational units responsible for regulation; manages the implementation of international cooperation activities; improves regulations; assesses quality, safety, and effectiveness; supervises registration/post-registration; and cooperates with inspection activities.

Per ResNo705 (amending ResNo585), the Coordination of Clinical Research on Medicines and Biological Products (Coordenação de Pesquisa Clínica em Medicamentos e Produtos Biológicos (COPEC)) is another administrative unit operating within the Collegiate Board. COPEC is responsible for overseeing clinical research on medicines and biological products conducted for registration and post-marketing surveillance purposes; evaluating petitions; carrying out Good Clinical Practice (GCP) inspections; assisting with international cooperation activities related to the regulation of clinical research on medicines involving human beings; and issuing regulations for granting or denying petitions subject to approval for the clinical research of medicines and biological products and decisions resulting from GCP inspections. See ResNo705 (amending ResNo585) for detailed information on GGMED, COPEC, and ANVISA’s organizational structure and administrative units.

Other Considerations

Per BRA-65, Brazil is a member of the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). ResNo945 indicates that Brazil has formally adopted the ICH’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28) and its updates. (Please note that the ICH Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) (BRA-121) was finalized on January 6, 2025).

Please note: Brazil is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (BRA-63), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see BRA-81.

Contact Information

Per BRA-132, the following is ANVISA’s contact information:

ANVISA
Assessoria do Sistema Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária
Setor de Indústria e Abastecimento (SIA)
Trecho 5 – Guará
Brasília – DF
CEP: 71205-050

Phone: (61) 3462-4120 or (61) 3462-6921
E-mail: asnvs@anvisa.gov.br

ANVISA’s Electronic Contact Form (BRA-68) may be used to submit technical questions.

Phone: 0 800 642 9782 (for general inquiries) (BRA-135). Calls can be made to specific administrative offices posted on ANVISA’s Who’s Who website (BRA-39).

Per BRA-12, the GGMED contact information is as follows:

General Management of Medicines (GGMED)
Phone: (61) 3462-6724
Email: medicamento.assessoria@anvisa.gov.br

Per BRA-18, the COPEC contact information is as follows:

Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (COPEC)
Phone: (61) 3462-5599/5526
Email: pesquisaclinica@anvisa.gov.br

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile. 
On November 11, 2025, the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) published RDC 997/2025, which states that primary and secondary clinical research petitions for medicines and biological products that meet the criteria for applying the optimized Reliance review procedure under ResNo945 and RegNo338 will be allocated to a specific queue. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.   
Overview

As set forth in ResNo945 and ResNo705 (amending ResNo585), the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) is responsible for reviewing and approving clinical trial applications (Clinical Drug Development Dossiers (Dossiês de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Medicamento (DDCMs))) for drugs to be registered in Brazil. (Note: Applications are also known as petitions in Brazil). Per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, clinical trials with drugs must have all or part of their clinical development in Brazil. ResNo945 also notes that the DDCM may be submitted at any stage of clinical drug development for one (1) or more phases of clinical trials. However, Phase IV post-marketing trials and non-interventional clinical research are not covered by this regulation, and should be initiated after obtaining the relevant ethical approvals in accordance with the specific standards of the National Research Ethics Authority.

Additionally, per LawNo14.874 and ResNo945, research involving human beings must be subject to prior ethical analysis by research ethics committees (ECs) (Comitês de Ética em Pesquisa (CEPs)). According to ResNo945, clinical trial applications can be submitted in parallel, however, a drug clinical trial may only be initiated after approval is obtained by both the EC (CEP) and ANVISA.

Clinical Trial Review Process

As described in ResNo705 (amending ResNo585), ANVISA’s Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (Coordenação de Pesquisa Clínica em Medicamentos e Produtos Biológicos (COPEC)) is responsible for conducting the review and approval of clinical trial applications (DDCMs). Per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, ANVISA’s technical analysis of a primary DDCM petition will only occur after the filing of at least one (1) Specific Clinical Trial Dossier (Dossiê Específico de Ensaio Clínico (DEEC)). A DEEC is defined as a collection of documents submitted as part of the Investigational Drug Development Plan (PDME) in the DDCM. ResNo945 explains that the absence of the DEEC will result in the rejection of the DDCM without technical analysis, except in cases of clinical trials involving more than one (1) experimental drug, with a primary DEEC petition that has already been linked to one (1) of the DDCMs of these drugs. See the Timeline of Review section for ANVISA’s petition review timelines. See also BRA-40 for information on ANVISA drug registration requirements.

Pursuant to ResNo945, substantial modifications to the investigational product (IP) refer to changes that potentially have an impact on the quality or safety of the experimental drug, active comparator, or placebo. Per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, substantial IP modifications and substantial protocol amendments must be linked as secondary petitions to the corresponding DDCM. Non-substantial IP modifications must always be submitted to ANVISA in the next petition for substantial IP modification, or as part of the drug development safety update (DSUR), whichever occurs first. ANVISA will issue a supplementary normative act regarding IP modifications considered to be substantial and non-substantial. See also the G-DDCMAmdmts for clarifying information on substantial and non-substantial protocol modifications. Refer to the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for IP modification submission process and documentation requirements.

Regarding substantial amendments to the clinical trial protocol, ResNo945 explains that an amendment should be considered substantial when it meets at least one (1) of the following criteria:

Changes to the clinical trial protocol that interfere with the safety or physical or mental integrity of the participants, or
A change that is likely to have an impact on the reliability or robustness of the data produced in the clinical trial
Per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, substantial protocol amendments must also be linked as secondary petitions to the corresponding DEEC. ResNo945 further explains that non-substantial clinical trial protocol amendments must always be submitted to ANVISA in the next substantial amendment petition, or as part of the final clinical trial protocol monitoring report, in cases where there are no substantial amendments by the end of the clinical trial. ANVISA will issue a supplementary normative act to comply with these provisions. See the G-DDCMAmdmts for additional information on protocol amendments. Refer to the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for protocol amendment submission requirements and substantial protocol amendment documentation requirements.

Per BRA-134 and ResNo506, ANVISA also reviews requests for clinical trials using advanced therapy products, which are known as Clinical Development Dossiers for Advanced Therapies (Dossiês de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Produtos de Terapias Avançadas (DDCTA)). See ResNo506 for more information on ANVISA’s role in reviewing and approving clinical trial applications submitted for studies using advanced therapy products in Brazil (i.e., medicines for human use that are based on genes, tissues, or cells). Per ResNo945, in the case of clinical development involving genetically modified organisms (GMOs) or derivatives, an applicant must consult the responsible body, the National Technical Commission on Biosafety – CTNBio (Comissão Técnica Nacional de Biossegurança – CTNBio), in accordance with current legislation.

ResNo945 further delineates that the approval of DDCM, DEEC, and secondary petitions filed with ANVISA prior to the publication of ResNo945 that are still awaiting technical analysis, will be assessed in accordance with the rules and requirements in force at the time of submission. Sponsors may also request that ANVISA review these petitions according to the optimized analysis procedure requirements discussed below in this section.

Pursuant to ResNo945, the DDCM or any linked clinical trial or related secondary petitions may at, any time, be cancelled or suspended when ANVISA:

Deems that the approval conditions have not been met, or if there are reports of safety, quality, or efficacy that significantly affect the trial participants or affect the reliability or robustness of the data obtained in the clinical trial
Participants are being exposed to significant and unreasonable risks
The sponsor violates the rules described in ResNo945 or fails to comply with the GCP principles and good manufacturing practice (GMP) requirements of the IP
In order to comply with these provisions, per ResNo945, ANVISA will notify the sponsor about the suspension or cancellation of DDCM or clinical trial and will open an administrative and/or investigative process, in accordance with current legislation, when applicable.

Inspection

In accordance with LawNo14.874, ANVISA is authorized to carry out good clinical practice (GCP) inspections of clinical research centers, sponsors, and contract research organizations (CROs) (clinical research representative organization (CRPO) in Brazil). ResNo945 further specifies that ANVISA may carry out GCP inspections of clinical trial centers, sponsors, CROs, laboratories, and other institutions involved in the development of the IP to verify the degree of adherence to current Brazilian legislation and compliance with GCP, in addition to ensuring the rights and duties that concern the scientific community and Brazil. In addition to specific GCP inspection standards issued by ANVISA, GCP inspections will follow the harmonized guidelines of the ICH’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28) and its updates which Brazil has formally adopted. (Please note that the ICH Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) (BRA-121) was finalized on January 6, 2025). Refer to ResNo945 for more information on ANVISA’s GCP inspection requirements.

RegNo122 also provides guidance on ANVISA inspection procedures to ensure drug clinical trials are conducted in compliance with GCP. Per BRA-30, ANVISA’s COPEC requires all clinical trial inspections to be conducted in accordance with BRA-28. GuideNo35-2020 and GuideNo36-2020 further explain that GCP inspections of sponsors and CRO representatives and in clinical trial centers may be carried out before, during, or after a clinical trial has been conducted and will be classified as either a routine inspection or complaint/suspected irregularity, per RegNo122. In addition, per GuideNo35-2020 and GuideNo36-2020, the inspections will involve at least two (2) ANVISA inspectors, one (1) of whom will be the lead inspector and the focal point for communication with either the clinical trial center or the sponsor/CRO(s). The inspections for both entities will take place over a maximum period of five (5) working days unless the period is altered with due justification. See GuideNo35-2020 and GuideNo36-2020 for additional details.

Priority Submissions

In addition to the previously stated DDCM requirements, ResNo204 establishes a priority category to register, amend previously registered, or request prior approval for drug submissions. ResNo204 states that the priority submission may be submitted as a DDCM or a DEEC. A priority DDCM submission is required to meet one (1) or more of the following criteria: new drug trial in any phase to be carried out in Brazil, the drug is part of the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s National Immunization Program, or the product is determined to be of strategic public health interest and included under the MOH’s Unified Health System (Sistema Único de Saúde (SUS)) (BRA-53). A priority DEEC submission is required to comply with the following: the drug will be used for neglected, emerging, or reemerging diseases, health emergencies, or serious debilitating conditions for which there is no alternative; the trial will be conducted exclusively with the pediatric population; or the drug will be used in a Phase I trial only to be manufactured in Brazil. The sponsor should specify at the time of submission that the new or amended protocol is a priority category request. If not confirmed prior to the technical review phase, the request for approval may be denied. ANVISA is required to first issue a written opinion letter within 45 calendar days from the first business day following protocol submission, a final opinion in 120 days for new drug registration requests, and a final opinion 60 days for post-registration petitions. See the Timeline of Review section for detailed timeline information. Refer to ResNo204, ResNo811 (which partially amends ResNo204), and BRA-14 for detailed information on priority submission requirements. See also BRA-82 for additional information on priority submissions.

New Drugs for Rare Diseases Submissions

ResNo205 sets forth specific approval procedures for clinical trials to be conducted to register new drugs to treat, diagnose, or prevent rare diseases. The applications may be submitted as an initial DDCM, a secondary petition linked to the original DDCM, or a DEEC either linked to the original DDCM or for a new process. The sponsor must delineate at the time of submitting a new drug submission (DDCM), an amended DDCM (secondary petition), or DEEC, whether the DDCM is pertaining to a rare disease drug. If not confirmed prior to the technical review phase, the request for approval may be denied.

In addition, per ResNo763, which modifies ResNo205, ANVISA has suspended the requirement for the sponsor to hold a pre-submission meeting to present a rare disease DDCM or amended DDCM. The pre-submission meeting is optional, and if the sponsor deems it necessary, then ANVISA will hold the meeting within 60 days following this request. Refer to ResNo205 and ResNo811 (which partially amends ResNo205) for additional submission documentation requirements.

Optimized Analysis Procedure Reviews

As delineated in ResNo945 and ResNo741, ANVISA has adopted a technical evaluation mechanism known as the “optimized analysis procedure” which uses the technical analysis or supporting documentation issued by an Equivalent Foreign Regulatory Authority (Autoridade Regulatória Estrangeira Equivalente (AREE)) as a sole or complementary reference, for its decisions. AREEs have regulatory practices aligned with those of ANVISA and are therefore considered to be in a practice of regulatory trust (referred to as Reliance). ANVISA designates a specific list of approved AREEs for each type of authorization request (see below for the AREE lists based on request type).

ResNo741 provides general criteria for the admissibility of the AREE regulatory documentation, which includes reports, opinions, or technical/legal documents, used to issue an opinion. Among other requirements, in order for ANVISA to adopt the optimized analysis procedure, the health surveillance process covered in the AREE’s documentation must meet all the requirements, criteria, and specifications established by ANVISA for the corresponding health surveillance process. ResNo945 also explains that the documents required for the instruction of each type of petition or process submitted, may be partially or fully exempted from technical analysis using the optimized analysis procedure by Reliance. ANVISA will also issue a supplementary normative act to establish the criteria and documents that may be partially or fully exempted from technical analysis based on Reliance.

Drug & Biological Product Registration/Post-Registration

In accordance with ResNo741, ANVISA approved RegNo289, which establishes specific criteria and procedures for ANVISA’s application of the optimized analysis procedure in which one (1) or more AREE assessments are used to analyze registration and post-registration authorization requests for medicines, vaccines, biological products, and their active substances that are already approved in the reference country. ANVISA will issue a Letter of Adequacy of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient Dossier (Carta de Adequação de Dossiê de Insumo Farmacêutico Ativo (CADIFA)) to certify the AREE has regulatory trust practices aligned with those of ANVISA and has ensured that products authorized for distribution have been adequately evaluated and meet recognized standards of quality, safety, and effectiveness.

Pursuant to RegNo289, ANVISA has designated the following foreign agencies as AREEs to review registration and post-registration authorization requests of medicines, vaccines, biological products and their active substances:

European Medicines Agency (EMA)
Health Canada
European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & HealthCare (EDQM)
Swiss Agency for Therapeutic Products (Swissmedic)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), United Kingdom
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), Australia
Refer to RegNo289 for detailed requirements on submitting a request for ANVISA authorization via the optimized analysis procedure. See ResNo741 for additional information on the optimized analysis procedure and AREE related requirements. See also the Manufacturing & Import section for AREE manufacturing and inspection criteria and procedures and Good Manufacturing Practices Certification via the optimized analysis procedure as delineated in RegNo292.

DDCMs, DEECs, Substantial IP Modifications & Substantial Protocol Amendments by Reliance

As per ResNo945, RegNo338, and BRA-122, the optimized analysis procedure based on Reliance is also applicable to primary DDCM and DEEC petitions, and secondary petitions for substantial modifications to the IP and substantial amendments to the clinical trial protocol. Pursuant to ResNo945, ANVISA will review the AREE documentation for compliance. Per ResNo945 and RegNo338, for the purposes of admissibility for analyzing primary and secondary petitions, the related documents must have been approved by at least one (1) of the AREEs recognized by ANVISA.

Per RegNo338, ANVISA has designated the following AREEs to review primary DDCM and DEEC petition requests, and secondary petition requests for substantial modifications to the IP and substantial amendments to the clinical trial protocol:

EMA and its member countries
Health Canada
Swissmedic
MHRA
FDA
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency (PMDA), Japan
ANVISA must be given the sponsor’s consent to communicate directly with the AREE about the clinical development process under analysis. ANVISA will also review any commitment terms or conditional approval assumed with the AREE and the details about the respective pending issues and referrals, if applicable.

According to RegNo338 and RegNo345 (amending RegNo338) following its evaluation, ANVISA will issue one (1) of the responses listed below:

If the criteria for applying the optimized analysis procedure by Reliance are met, the status of the secondary petition request will be updated to "Approved"
If the secondary petition does not comply with the criteria for applying the optimized analysis procedure by Reliance, the status of the petition request will be updated to "Not Approved" and all documents linked to the petition will be subject to a full analysis, as described in ResNo945. In this case, an official letter will be sent to the company with the respective justification
ResNo945 and BRA-122 further state that the admissibility of the optimized analysis procedure by Reliance does not presuppose prioritization of petition analysis, however, per ResNo945, ANVISA may create specific queues for the allocation and analysis of these petitions. BRA-122 also indicates that petitions will be analyzed in accordance with the chronological order of submission (issue date of the file), regardless of whether they fit into the optimized procedure. However, petitions prioritized under the terms of ResNo204 and ResNo205 may also be included in the criteria for applying the optimized analysis procedure when requested by the applicant.

Additionally, per ResNo945 and BRA-122, ANVISA will be responsible for deciding whether to accept the request for analysis using the optimized procedure, including opting for the ordinary analysis of the petition, regardless of the decision issued by the AREE. Per ResNo945, ANVISA may carry out complementary monitoring actions, such as GCP audits or inspections to monitor DDCMs, DEECs, and secondary petitions approved by the optimized analysis procedure. Monitoring actions include the assessment of information regarding the safety profile, based on national and international alerts, and other duly justified actions, at ANVISA’s discretion, that may contribute to maintaining the approved conditions.

See the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for details.

DDCM & IP Substantial Modifications by Risk Assessment

As delineated in ResNo945, the optimized analysis procedure may also be applied based on the risk or complexity criteria of the clinical trial or IP. When requested by the sponsor, this type of technical analysis applies to DDCMs and substantial IP modifications. The required documents for each type of petition or process may be partially or fully exempted from technical analysis, through the optimized analysis procedure, according to the risk and complexity of the clinical trial. ANVISA categorizes clinical trial risk as low, moderate, or high. Refer to RegNo338 for more information on risk assessment criteria. ResNo945 further notes that in cases where the placebo, when used, is identical to the registered IP, differing from it only by the absence of the active pharmaceutical ingredient, and/or the active comparator is identical to the registered drug, ANVISA’s evaluation of the documents present in the IMPD or DPI may also be analyzed by the optimized procedure by risk assessment. Per RegNo338, ANVISA will provide a specific petition characterization form for the sponsor to complete for the proper identification of situations in which the optimized analysis procedure is supported by experience using the IP.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)

As set forth in ResNo857, the sponsor is responsible for paying a Health Surveillance Inspection Fee (Taxa de Fiscalização de Vigilância Sanitária (TFVS)) to submit a clinical trial application (Clinical Drug Development Dossier (Dossier de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Medicamento (DDCM))) to the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)). As per ResNo857 and BRA-47, once the sponsor has completed the process of submitting a primary DDCM petition, ANVISA’s Solicita Electronic Petition Request System (BRA-56) generates a document known as the Union Collection Guide (Guia de Recolhimento da União (GRU)). According to ResNo857, ANVISA uses the GRU as its primary method to generate TFVS fees. In addition to ResNo857, see also BRA-51 for detailed information on the GRU, and BRA-69 for information on the TFVS fee. See also BRA-38 and BRA-47 for additional information on accessing BRA-56.

Per BRA-69, ANVISA determines the TFVS fee based on the company’s size and the subject code assigned to the application request. Per the TFVS fee table provided in ResNo857 and OrdNo45, the fees range from 983.85 Brazilian Reals to 19,677 Brazilian Reals to obtain clinical research approval. Per BRA-69, users can also obtain their petition fee prior to submission by searching ANVISA’s Consultation System webpage (BRA-44) using the “Subject Consultation” (Consulta de Assuntos) tool. BRA-44 provides the fee value based on the petition description subject code. See BRA-69 for further fees information. See also BRA-129 for additional instructions on searching BRA-44.

Payment Instructions

As described in ResNo857, the TFVS fee must be paid by the GRU; the Federal Revenue Collection Document (Documento de Arrecadação de Receitas Federais (DARF)) (BRA-111), which is a document used to pay taxes, fees, or contributions; PagTesouro (BRA-114); or other methods that may be established. BRA-43 also states that bank payments may be completed at any financial institution participating in the bank clearing system, via the Internet, self-service (ATM) terminals, or directly at the cashier’s window. Per ResNo857 and BRA-43, payment must be made within 30 days after the GRU has been issued.

Per BRA-115, for payments made using ANVISA’s Solicita Electronic Petition Request System (BRA-56), users can select payment through the PagTesouro online payment system (BRA-114). As per BRA-47, users choosing to pay via PagTesouro (BRA-114) may do so by credit card, or by Pix, which is an instant payment method where a QR Code is generated to complete the payment. Per BRA-47 and BRA-115, users may also choose the “Generate Boleto” option in the Solicita system (BRA-56) to generate the GRU payment slip that can be used to pay via conventional banking methods, with confirmation within two (2) business days. See BRA-47 for further guidance on how to complete the payment process via the Solicita system (BRA-56). See also BRA-115 for additional information on PagTesouro (BRA-114).

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.  

Overview

New National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings

LawNo14.874 introduces the National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings (Sistema Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa com Seres Humanos). The system consists of the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s National Research Ethics Authority and the research ethics committees (ECs) (Comitês de Ética em Pesquisa (CEPs)), which must be accredited by the National Research Ethics Authority. In this framework, the ECs (CEPs) are solely responsible for the ethical review of clinical trial protocols involving human participants. During the transition to the new system, the current National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) system will continue to be implemented and described in this profile. The ClinRegs team will provide additional information on the implementation of LawNo14.874 as it becomes available. See also BRA-117 for additional information.

CEP/CONEP System

As per ResNo466, ResNo446, and OSNo001, CONEP is the central body responsible for coordinating the network of institutional ECs (CEPs), and for registering and accrediting the ECs (CEPs). CONEP is a collegiate advisory body directly linked to the National Health Council (Conselho Nacional de Saúde (CNS)), a permanent body within the MOH’s Health System (Sistema Único de Saúde (SUS)) (BRA-53).

Both the ECs (CEPs) and CONEP are responsible for evaluating the ethical aspects of all research involving human beings and for approving the research protocols when applicable, as explained in ResNo466, ResNo446, OSNo001, and ResNo706. ResNo466 further notes that institutions conducting research involving human participants may establish one (1) or more ECs (CEPs) according to their institution’s requirements. For those institutions lacking an EC (CEP), or in the case of an investigator without an institutional affiliation, CONEP is required to suggest an EC (CEP) to conduct the protocol review. Together, the ECs (CEPs) and CONEP represent the ethical review system in Brazil, known as the CEP/CONEP System, as described in ResNo466, OSNo001, G-ClinProtocols-FAQs, and ResNo706. See also BRA-50 and BRA-49 for useful information on CONEP and the CNS.

Ethics Committee Composition

National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP)

As per OSNo001 and ResNo446, CONEP is an independent and multidisciplinary organization consisting of 30 appointed members and five (5) alternate members. Per ResNo446, CONEP also has an Executive Secretary appointed by the MOH’s Secretariat for Science, Technology and Strategic Inputs and an Assistant Secretary appointed by the CNS to coordinate CONEP’s work and to manage the technical and operational work to be carried out by the Executive Secretary. See ResNo466, OSNo001, and ResNo446 for detailed information on CONEP composition and responsibilities. See also BRA-50 for useful information on CONEP.

Research Ethics Committees (CEPs)

National Research Ethics Authority

LawNo14.874 specifies that the EC (CEP) should be composed of a collegiate, interdisciplinary team in the medical, scientific, and non-scientific areas, to ensure that the members have the necessary qualifications and experience to analyze all aspects inherent to the research, including medical, scientific, ethical aspects and those related to good clinical practice (GCP). The EC (CEP) is also required to have in its composition one (1) Research Participant Representative (Representante de Participante de Pesquisa (RPP)).

National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP)

As per OMREC, the EC (CEP) is required to be composed of a minimum of seven (7) members having proven expertise in research. ResNo706, in turn, states the EC (CEP) must be composed of at least nine (9) members with at least two (2) RPPs. Additionally, OSNo001, OMREC, and ResNo706 indicate that the EC (CEP) should be multidisciplinary, represent a balanced gender and age composition, and consist of members embodying community interests and concerns.

OMREC and ResNo706 further state that not more than half of its members should belong to the same professional category. Additionally, per ResNo706, at least half of the members must demonstrate experience in research. Also, any changes to the infrastructure, composition of members or administrative employees must be communicated to CONEP. When there is a change in EC (CEP) member composition, at least one third of the members of the previous composition must be maintained. Changes in EC (CEP) coordination must also be communicated and approved by CONEP. See ResNo706 for additional information. Additional criteria for EC (CEP) membership is also available in Section 2 of OMREC.

ResNo647 also establishes standards and mandatory requirements for all ECs (CEPs) in Brazil to include RPPs who represent the interests of research participants. RPPs must be at least 18 years old; have a history of participation in a social and/or community movement in which the participation is not limited to health areas and can cover all segments of social movement activity; and must be able to express the viewpoints and interests of individuals and/or groups of research participants in order to represent the collective interests of different audiences in the CEP/CONEP System. See ResNo647 for detailed information on RPPs. See also BRA-29 for additional information.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

National Research Ethics Authority

As per LawNo14.874, the ECs (CEPs) must adopt operational procedures and are responsible for the following:

Operating regularly
Ensuring adequate infrastructure to carry out its activities
Maintaining a publicly available list of its members with their respective professional qualifications
Preparing a document describing the operational procedures adopted
Keeping written records of its activities and meetings
As described in LawNo14.874, the deliberation on the ethical adequacy of the research will take place in a previously scheduled meeting, which must have a minimum quorum, as defined in the EC’s (CEP's) internal regulations. Only active EC (CEP) members are permitted to issue opinions and deliberate on the ethical adequacy of submitted research. EC (CEP) members may invite external experts and representatives of vulnerable groups to give their opinion on specific issues related to research projects, but they will not have the right to vote. Once duly accredited or certified, ECs (CEPs) have complete autonomy to issue their opinions, in compliance with GCP.

In addition, LawNo14.874 explains that depending on the degree of risk involved in the research, the role of the research ethics review body will be exercised by one (1) of the following:

An EC (CEP) accredited or certified by the National Research Ethics Authority, in the case of low or moderate risk research
An EC (CEP) accredited by the National Research Ethics Authority, in the case of high-risk research
Also, per LawNo14.874, in the case of research involving a special group, to be established by regulation, the EC (CEP) must ensure, whenever possible, during the protocol discussion, the participation of one (1) representative of the special group as an ad-hoc member; and one (1) consultant familiar with the language, customs, and traditions of the specific community, when the research involves that community. EC (CEP) members may also invite external experts and representatives of vulnerable groups to issue an opinion on specific issues related to the research projects, but these individuals should not have the right to vote. Once duly accredited or certified, ECs (CEPs) have complete autonomy to issue their opinions, in compliance with GCP. The EC (CEP) will also keep all project related documents on file for a period of five (5) years after the end of the research, with digital archiving permitted. As stated in LawNo14.874, the institution hosting the EC (CEP) will promote and support the training of its committee members, with an emphasis on ethical and methodological aspects related to the rights of research participants. The EC’s (CEP)’s activities are subject to inspection and monitoring by the National Research Ethics Authority. Failure by the EC (CEP) to comply with the provisions of LawNo14.874 will result in its de-accreditation by the National Research Ethics Authority, in accordance with regulations.

See LawNo14.874 for additional EC (CEP) terms of reference and review procedure requirements.

National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP)

As set forth in OMREC, each EC (CEP) must have written standard operating procedures (SOPs), including a process for conducting reviews. The SOPs should include information on EC (CEP) composition, meeting schedules, frequency of reviews, requirements for initial and ongoing evaluation of the research study, and requirements for notifying the investigator and the institution of results related to the study’s initial and ongoing evaluation. ResNo706 further specifies the EC (CEP) is responsible for the following:

Maintaining adequate composition
Choosing, for coordination, an EC (CEP) member that does not present a potential conflict of interest, by vote of the absolute majority (50% plus one) of the total number of full members
Issuing opinions and sending CONEP reports on its activities within regulatory deadlines
Maintaining confidentiality of all information regarding research protocols and the content of EC (CEP) meetings
Preparing the internal regulations
Analyzing research protocols of the proposing institutions, located only in the same Federative Unit as the EC (CEP) registration
Ensuring periodic training of its members, through a permanent training plan on ethics in research involving human beings, including content targeted and accessible to RPPs
Promoting educational activities in the area of research ethics involving human beings, with its members and the community in general
Maintaining regular and effective communication with CONEP
Receiving complaints and investigating ethical infractions, especially those that involve risks to research participants, communicating the facts to the competent bodies for investigation and, when appropriate, to the public prosecutor's office
ResNo706 further notes that an EC (CEP) is responsible for receiving and considering, from an ethical point of view, the research protocols indicated by CONEP. However, the committee may also refuse the ethical assessment of research protocols indicated by CONEP, upon justification. Per OMREC and ResNo706, the majority of committee members must be involved in the review and approval process, and the necessary quorum must be obtained to approve or deny permission to conduct a study as specified in each EC’s (CEP’s) SOPs. As per ResNo706, the term of office of EC (CEP) members is valid for four (4) years, with the possibility of reappointment, at the discretion of the CEP. At the end of the term of office, an EC (CEP) member may remain in this role up to 90 days, until a replacement or reappointment takes place.

See OMREC for detailed EC (CEP) procedures and information on other administrative processes. See CLNo1-2022 for instructions on submitting administrative documents via email to CONEP to speed up EC (CEP) accreditation and renewal processes and maintain regular functioning of ECs (CEPs), and CLNo25 for guidance on conducting virtual CEP/CONEP system meetings.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.  

Overview

New National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings

LawNo14.874 introduces the National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings (Sistema Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa com Seres Humanos). The system consists of the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s National Research Ethics Authority and the research ethics committees (ECs) (Comitês de Ética em Pesquisa (CEPs)), which must be accredited by the National Research Ethics Authority. In this framework, the ECs (CEPs) are solely responsible for the ethical review of clinical trial protocols involving human participants. During the transition to the new system, the current National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) system will continue to be implemented and described in this profile. The ClinRegs team will provide additional information on the implementation of LawNo14.874 as it becomes available.) See also BRA-117 for additional information.

National Research Ethics Authority

According to LawNo14.874, the primary scope of information reviewed by ECs (CEPs) relates to protecting the dignity, safety, and well-being of research participants throughout the conduct of a clinical trial. The ECs (CEPs) are responsible for acting independently and autonomously before and during the trial through their analysis, review, and ethical approval of research protocols and their amendments, as well as through their evaluation of the methods and materials used to obtain and document the free and informed consent of research participants.

As part of their ethical review and analysis, LawNo14.874 indicates that the ECs (CEPs) are also responsible for requesting the provision of additional information to research participants when deemed essential to protect their rights, safety, and well-being; ensuring the research project and other documents adequately address relevant ethical issues and satisfy applicable regulatory requirements, including those related to good clinical practice (GCP); and, ensuring adequate means are provided for obtaining consent from the research participant or the legal representative, among others. The ECs (CEPs) must also pay special attention to protecting the welfare of participants deemed to be vulnerable (See the Vulnerable Populations and Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates sections for additional information about these populations).

As part of the National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings, per LawNo14.874, the ECs (CEPs) are guided by the following principles:

Protection of the dignity, safety, and well-being of the research participant
Encouragement of technical and scientific development
Independence, transparency, and publicity
Equality in the application of criteria and procedures for analyzing research projects, according to the risk-benefit relationship inferred from their protocols
Efficiency and agility in the analysis and issuing of opinions
Multidisciplinary focus
Social control, with the participation of research participant representative(s)
Respect for GCP
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP)

ResNo466, ResNo251, and the G-ClinProtocols-FAQs state that the primary scope of information assessed by ECs (CEPs) and CONEP, jointly known as the CEP/CONEP System, relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial.

Per ResNo466, ResNo251, and OSNo001, the CEP/CONEP System members must pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations). ResNo304 further establishes specific ethical requirements for research studies involving indigenous populations. Detailed information on documentation and consent requirements for studies involving indigenous populations is available in the Documentation Requirements, Vulnerable Populations, and Consent for Specimen sections.

The CEP/CONEP System members are also responsible for ensuring an independent, timely, and competent review of all ethical aspects of the clinical trial protocol as stated in ResNo466 and OSNo001. It must act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved, evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants; confirming the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, and methods; and verifying the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards. Refer to ResNo466 and OSNo001 for detailed ethical review guidelines that govern the CEP/CONEP System.

CONEP-Designated Protocol Reviews

Per ResNo580, the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s Secretary of Science, Technology and Strategic Inputs refers protocols to CONEP that are determined to be of strategic public health interest for the Unified Health System (Sistema Único de Saúde (SUS)) (BRA-53). ResNo580 recognizes strategic research protocols as those studies that may contribute to public health, justice, reduction of social inequalities and technological dependencies, and those that address public health emergencies. Refer to the Oversight of Ethics Committees section for additional information on CONEP’s review requirements for this type of protocol. A working group was also created to support the MOH’s assessment of research involving human beings when carried out in the SUS sphere, per OrdNo552. The interagency working group includes National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)), CONEP, and the National Health Council (Conselho Nacional de Saúde (CNS)), and is coordinated by an MOH representative.

In addition to conducting public health and international project reviews, per ResNo466, ResNo446, and ResNo340, CONEP is required to review certain studies involving human genetics, human reproduction, invasive therapeutic procedures, indigenous populations, genetically modified organisms, embryonic stem cells, and the establishment and operation of biobanks for research. Refer to ResNo466, ResNo446, and ResNo340 for specific details on CONEP protocol review requirements. See also CLNo172 for additional guidance on classifying protocol thematic areas that require CONEP review (e.g., protocols on the constitution and operation of biobanks for research purposes); CLNo34 for guidance on processing biobank development protocols electronically, and; CLNo041 for CONEP specimens consent instructions. See also ResNo506 for information on the role of CEP/CONEP System members in reviewing protocols submitted for clinical trials with advanced therapy products in Brazil (i.e., medicines for human use based on genes, tissues, or cells).

CONEP Review Pathways

ResNo674 provides review criteria and corresponding timelines to classify research and the processing of research protocols involving human beings in the CEP/CONEP System based upon study type and level of intervention in the human body. The regulation divides research into two (2) groups: 1) studies seeking to describe or understand phenomena that has happened or happen in the research participant’s daily life; and 2) studies that aim to verify the effect of an investigational product (IP) or technique used in research, deliberately applied to the participant, prospectively monitored, and which may or may not involve a control group. The studies are further characterized according to procedure and whether it involves intervention in the human body and if it is invasive.

Classification by study design and procedure is as follows: Type A – observational research; Type B – observational research with human body intervention; and Type C – investigational research designed to verify the effect of an IP (including a medicine, drug, biological product, or health device) or an investigational technique used in research, deliberately applied to the participant, prospectively monitored, with or without a control. Type C studies are further divided into two (2) subtypes: C1 studies, in which the object of investigation is not an IP in the health area, and C2 studies, in which the object of investigation is an IP in the health area.

EC analysis varies according to the type of research and modulation factors (i.e., consent process, confidentiality, and/or research methods), and requires the reviewer to verify the documentation the investigator submits in Plataforma Brasil (BRA-34). Per BRA-93, Plataforma Brasil is a national and unified database of human subjects research records that represents the entire CEP/CONEP System. The platform is also used to track research applications from submission to final approval by the EC (CEP), and when necessary, by CONEP. See BRA-33 for the most current Plataforma Brazil CEP and investigator manuals.

There are four (4) ways of processing protocols in the CEP/CONEP System: express, simplified, collegiate, and special collegiate; the modulation factors per Annex II of ResNo674 provides additional characteristics to further modify the protocol processing method to be used. See ResNo674 and BRA-4 for additional information on the CEP/CONEP System’s protocol research classification and processing procedures. (Note: Per BRA-9, the protocol classification and processing system has not yet been implemented in BRA-34. The ClinRegs team will continue to monitor Plataforma Brasil (BRA-34) for any developments.)

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

National Research Ethics Authority

As delineated in ResNo945, ANVISA and the EC (CEP) must approve a clinical trial application (Clinical Drug Development Dossier (Dossier de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Medicamento (DDCM))) before a trial is permitted to commence. Research involving human beings must be subject to prior ethical analysis by ECs (CEPs) according to National Research Ethics Authority legislation and regulations. Clinical trial applications can be submitted in parallel, however, a drug clinical trial may only be initiated after approval is obtained by both the EC (CEP) and ANVISA.

In addition, as indicated in ResNo945, the EC (CEP) must review and approve any protocol amendments prior to those changes being implemented. There is no stated expiration date for an EC (CEP) approval in ResNo945.

As stated in LawNo14.874, the EC (CEP) research ethics analysis process will be instructed with the information and documents established in specific regulations. All documents requested by the EC (CEP) must be provided for in an act of the MOH, in a regulation, or in the rules of the EC (CEP) itself and be relevant to the matter analyzed.

Per LawNo14.874, the EC (CEP) will issue an opinion following acceptance or denial of the all the submitted research documents. Before issuing the opinion, the EC (CEP) may request additional information or documents from the investigator or research sponsor, or request that adjustments be made to the research documentation. The EC’s (CEP’s) review will be suspended during this time, and the investigator will be given time to meet the EC’s (CEP’s) demands. However, the EC (CEP) study analysis process may be canceled in case of non-compliance with the deadline. At the discretion of the EC (CEP), the investigator may participate in the collegiate meeting to provide clarifications about the research, but the investigator is prohibited from attending the meeting while the final decision is being made. Upon completion of its review, the EC (CEP) opinion will be one (1) of the following: approval of the research; non-approval of the research; or, suspension, when approved research that is already in progress needs to be interrupted for safety reasons. The decision contained in the EC’s (CEP's) opinion may be initially appealed to the EC (CEP) that issued the opinion and, subsequently, the opinion may be appealed one (1) final time to the National Research Ethics Authority. All those involved in conducting, monitoring, evaluating, or approving the research who have direct access to its records, to verify compliance with the procedures and applicable legislation and the validity or integrity of the data, must ensure the preservation of the confidentiality of the data and the anonymity of the research participant, in accordance with current legislation.

After the start of the research, per LawNo14.874, if there is a need for a change that interferes with the risk-benefit relationship or the approved documentation, the coordinating investigator will submit, in writing, an amendment to the research project, duly justified, for analysis and opinion by the EC (CEP) that analyzed the research. The amendment may only be implemented after approval by the EC (CEP), in accordance with this law, except when the safety of the research participant depends on its immediate implementation. The provisions for the initial research project review are also applicable to amendments to the research project.

LawNo14.874 also notes that the ethical analysis of research involving more than one (1) research center in the country will be carried out by a single EC (CEP), preferably the one linked to the research coordinating center, which will issue the opinion and notify the ECs (CEPs) of the other participating centers of its decision. Additionally, research of strategic interest to the MOH’s Unified Health System (Sistema Único de Saúde (SUS)) (BRA-53) and relevant to responding to public health emergencies will be given priority in ethical analysis and will be subject to special analysis procedures, including deadlines. See the Timeline of Review section for detailed timeline information.

In addition, research conducted with human beings that does not comply with the provisions of LawNo14.874 constitutes an ethical infraction and subjects the offender to disciplinary sanctions provided for in the legislation of the professional council to which the sponsor or the CRO is affiliated, without prejudice to applicable civil and criminal sanctions. For the purposes of applying the disciplinary sanctions, the EC (CEP) or the National Research Ethics Authority will notify the competent professional councils of the ethical infraction committed. Failure to comply with the provisions of LawNo14.874, and failure to comply with the GCP standards per ResNo945, constitutes a health infraction and subjects the offender to the penalties provided for in LawNo6.437, and in specific health regulations, without prejudice to applicable civil and criminal sanctions.

National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP)

As per ResNo466 and OSNo001, ANVISA and the EC (CEP) (and CONEP, if applicable) must approve a clinical trial application before a trial is permitted to commence. Per OSNo001, the EC (CEP) must also review and approve any protocol amendments prior to those changes being implemented. If applicable, CONEP may also review protocol amendments. (See CLNo038 for the criteria CONEP uses to process protocol amendments.) ResNo466 and OSNo001 specify that the development and submission of research, as well as the implementation and disclosure of EC (CEP) and CONEP opinions, must occur via BRA-34. CLNo24 and CLNo24-Note for CONEP’s general guidelines for investigators and ECs (CEPs) on conducting clinical trials.

Additionally, CLNo040 specifies that if investigational brochure (IB) updates result in modifications to the detailed protocol and/or the informed consent form (ICF), then a protocol amendment must be submitted. In this case, the EC (CEP) will analyze the IB together with the other documents pertaining to the amendment, and, if necessary, the required amendments and/or clarifications will be requested.

Per CLNo29, in the case of an appeal, only the investigator responsible for the protocol, which had a substantiated opinion of non-approval, may submit a request to the CEP/CONEP System via Platforma Brasil (BRA-34). The appeal must be filed within 30 calendar days, counting from the first day following the issuance of the substantiated opinion of non-approval. Appeals submitted to the EC (CEP) will be reviewed and a substantiated opinion analyzing the appeal will be issued within 30 calendar days following receipt. If the EC (CEP) considers the requirements and justifications presented in the appeal to be appropriate in order to continue the ethical analysis, the appeal will be approved, or pending approval, if the protocol requires adjustments prior to approval. However, if the appeal is not approved by the EC (CEP), the investigator may appeal to CONEP. CONEP, in turn, has a deadline of up to 45 days after receiving the appeal to issue a substantiated opinion of approved, pending, or not approved, when evaluating the appeal in relation to the substantiated opinion issued by the EC (CEP). If CONEP does not approve the appeal, the investigator, upon receiving the non-approval opinion from CONEP, may file an appeal directly to CONEP itself. From an analysis of the resources submitted to the EC (CEP) and/or CONEP, CONEP may issue an “Approve with Recommendation” opinion to the EC (CEP), when applicable. If CONEP does not approve the appeal, the processing of the appeal is terminated, the research protocol is archived, and no other appeal requests will be permitted. There is no stated expiration date for an EC (CEP) approval in ResNo466 or OSNo001. See the Timeline of Review section for detailed timeline information.

Foreign Research

As delineated in ResNo292, ResNo446, and ResNo466, applications with coordination and/or sponsorship originating outside of Brazil require additional EC review by CONEP. Per ResNo446, an exception to the required CONEP review applies to studies that have been fully carried out abroad and have been approved by an EC or equivalent body in the country of origin. ResNo580 also amends the ResNo466 requirements related to co-sponsored research projects and those involved with shipping human biological materials. This regulation states that when the MOH’s Secretariat of Science, Technology and Strategic Health Inputs issues an official agreement for a specific research project, the EC (CEP) for the proposing institution may conduct its review without the need for additional review by CONEP.

ResNo292 also explains that the scope of research from abroad or with foreign participation includes: collaboration between public or private foreign individuals or legal entities; sending and/or receiving biological materials from humans; sending and/or receiving data and information collected to aggregate research results; and international multicenter studies. For protocols within this thematic area, per ResNo292, special attention should be given to insuring the EC or equivalent institution within the originating country has issued an approval. If not, the Brazilian EC (CEP) and CONEP must approve the protocol. Refer to ResNo292 and the G-ClinProtocols-FAQs for additional guidance on research studies submitted from abroad.

Multicenter Research

Per ResNo346, for multicenter research protocols, the coordinating center’s EC (CEP) should initially review the protocol and forward it to CONEP for review. Per OSNo001, the principal investigator is also required to submit a list of the participating institutions and associated protocols, the coordinating center, and the EC (CEP) designated to monitor the study’s progress as part of the research protocol package sent to the EC (CEP) for review. ResNo346 further notes that CONEP will only evaluate the first protocol submitted and then send its final opinion to the original EC (CEP) and the other participating institutions. ResNo674 similarly explains that the initial analysis of the research protocol using the research classification procedure will occur at the EC (CEP) of the coordinating center or the accredited EC (CEP), when applicable, and will be subsequently forwarded for analysis by the EC (CEP) of the other co-participating centers and/or institutions, after approval.

See ResNo346 for additional multicenter protocol processing information.

Exemption from Review

Pursuant to Article 26 of ResNo674, CLNo12 provides further guidance on research that is exempt from ethical assessment by the CEP/CONEP system. Research that is exempt includes protocols that fall exclusively into the following categories: public opinion surveys with unidentifiable participants; research that uses publicly accessible information; research that uses public domain information; census research carried out by government agencies; research carried out exclusively with information or data already available in aggregate form, without the possibility of individual identification; research carried out exclusively with scientific texts to review the scientific literature; research that aims at the theoretical deepening of situations that emerge spontaneously and contingently in professional practice, as long as it does not reveal data that can identify the individuals; activity carried out with the sole purpose of education, teaching, extension or training, without the purpose of scientific research, of undergraduate students, technical course, or professionals in specialization; market research; scientific research carried out with cells, tissues, organs, and organisms of nonhuman origin, including their biological products, provided there is no interaction with research participants or imply the collection or use of human biological material to obtain them; and, activity whose purpose is to describe or analyze the productive or administrative process exclusively for organizational development purposes.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
National Research Ethics Authority

No information is currently available regarding research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)) fees.

National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP)

According to ResNo466, OMREC, and ResNo706, the National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) does not permit ECs (CEPs), to charge a fee to review clinical trial protocols. OMREC further explains that financing to support ethical reviews should come from a specific scientific committee budget designated within each institution.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.  

Overview

New National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings

LawNo14.874 introduces the National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings (Sistema Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa com Seres Humanos). The system consists of the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s National Research Ethics Authority and the research ethics committees (ECs) (Comitês de Ética em Pesquisa (CEPs)), which must be accredited by the National Research Ethics Authority. In this framework, the ECs (CEPs) are solely responsible for the ethical review of clinical trial protocols involving human participants. During the transition to the new system, the current National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) system will continue to be implemented and described in this profile. The ClinRegs team will provide additional information on the implementation of LawNo14.874 as it becomes available. See also BRA-117 for additional information.

National Research Ethics Authority

Per LawNo14.874, the National Research Ethics Authority, an interdisciplinary and independent collegiate body that is part of the MOH, is responsible for the following:

Issuing regulatory standards on ethics research
Evaluating the effectiveness of the National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings
Accrediting and certifying the ECs (CEPs) so that they are able to perform the function of ethical analysis in research, according to the degree of risk involved
Monitoring, supporting, and supervising the ECs (CEPs) in relation to the analysis of research protocols and compliance with the pertinent standards
Promoting and supporting the training of EC (CEP) members, with special emphasis on ethical and methodological aspects
Acting as an appeals court for decisions made by ECs (CEPs)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP)

As per ResNo466, OSNo001, and ResNo446, CONEP is the central statutory body responsible for the registration, audit, and accreditation of ECs (CEPs). CONEP was created by the MOH to provide ethical oversight of clinical research and to safeguard the rights and welfare of human participants involved in clinical studies. CONEP reports to the CNS, the advisory body to the MOH.

As delineated in ResNo466, OSNo001, and ResNo446, CONEP’s core responsibilities center on:

Examining the ethical aspects of research involving human participants
Analyzing and monitoring research protocols and issuing opinions on applications with coordination or sponsorship originating outside Brazil, unless the co-sponsor is the Brazilian Government and applications are related to specialized thematic areas (i.e., human genetics, human reproduction, vaccines, and human biological materials)
Preparing and updating relevant ethical standards
Registering, auditing, accrediting, and training ECs (CEPs)
Monitoring EC (CEP) processes
Promoting and participating in educational EC (CEP) activities
See also the Scope of Review section for detailed EC (CEP) and CONEP review requirements associated with protocols originating outside of Brazil.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

National Research Ethics Authority

As stated in LawNo14.874, the National Research Ethics Authority is responsible for accrediting and certifying the research ethics committees (ECs) (Comitês de Ética em Pesquisa (CEPs)) so that they are able to perform ethical research reviews according to the degree of risk involved.

National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP)

As per ResNo466, SP006REC, OSNo001, ResNo446, and ResNo706, all ECs (CEPs) must be registered and accredited by CONEP. CONEP’s Executive Secretariat who performs a documentation review to ensure compliance with the requirements delineated in ResNo446 carries out accreditation. ResNo706 further states that CEP registration and accreditation may only be requested by health, teaching, or research institutions headquartered in Brazil, without potential conflict of interest, and in good standing with competent bodies. The granting of EC (CEP) registration and accreditation is prohibited to research centers maintained or linked to Representative Clinical Research Representative Organizations (Organização Representativa de Pesquisa Clínica (ORPCs)) and professional category associations.

CNSResNo506 states that accreditation is valid for three (3) years. ResNo706, in turn, indicates that the term of validity of EC (CEP) accreditation is four (4) years.

ResNo706 specifies that registration and accreditation of the EC (CEP), as well as its renewal, will be carried out upon submission of the following documents:

Application sent by the supporting institution, signed by its legal representative, containing the description of this institution and the commitment to ensure the minimum operating conditions of the EC (CEP)
Proof of the minimum operating requirements of the supporting institution, in accordance with specific standards
Request form, according to the model provided by CONEP
Letters of appointment of Research Participant Representatives (RPPs), in accordance with the specific resolution
Act of designation of the EC (CEP)
EC (CEP) internal regulations
Additionally, per ResNo706, to begin activities, the EC (CEP) must, within 90 days after the announcement of registration and accreditation approval, prove the adequate training of its members. The approval of registration and accreditation of the EC (CEP) that does not begin its activities will be revoked within 120 days after approval of its registration. The renewal of the EC (CEP) accreditation must be initiated 90 days before the expiration date of its validity and be completed before it expires. An extension of the deadline for renewal may be requested once for a maximum period of 90 days when justified.

CNSResNo506, by comparison, states that to apply for accreditation, as well as renewal, an EC (CEP) is required to submit the following documentation along with a proposal for accreditation:

Formal application justifying the EC (CEP)'s accreditation request
Current EC (CEP) internal regulations
Description of the EC (CEP)’s current functioning and infrastructure
Proposal of the minimum number of high-risk protocols of other institutions that the EC (CEP) undertakes to evaluate on an individual basis, after obtaining the accreditation certificate
Report of EC (CEP) activities for the three (3) years prior to the publication date of the public call
See CNSResNo506 for additional documentation requirements.

As noted in CNSResNo506 and SP006REC, the renewal application must be submitted within the window of 60 days before to 60 days after the accreditation’s expiration date. Once the deadline has elapsed, and no renewal has been requested, the accreditation certificate will be canceled automatically. Additionally, per CNSResNo506, the accreditation certificate may be canceled, at any time, at the request of the EC (CEP), upon presentation in writing, without prejudice to the loss of its registration. In the absence of compliance with current CNS norms, CONEP will cancel the accreditation certificate, consubstantiating its decision in opinion. In case of cancellation of the accreditation by CONEP, the EC (CEP) may appeal. During the review period, the accredited CEP will maintain the rights conferred by the accreditation certificate. SP006REC also notes that if communication with CONEP during the pending renewal process is interrupted by the EC (CEP) for more than 60 days, the EC (CEP) registration will be automatically cancelled and the EC (CEP) will be notified by official letter.

See SP006REC, CNSResNo506, and ResNo706 for additional details on CONEP’s accreditation process. See CLNo1-2022 for instructions on submitting administrative documents via email to CONEP to speed up EC (CEP) accreditation and renewal processes and maintain regular functioning of ECs (CEPs).

High-Risk Research Protocols

In addition to being accredited by CONEP per the earlier stated requirements, CNSResNo506 explains that ECs (CEPs) may also be certified for their role in the ethical analysis of high-risk research protocols. As per ResNo674, the CNS has published protocol risk classification and processing guidelines to be used in the CEP/CONEP System to provide criteria to assess the risk level of research protocols.

Per CNSResNo506, until ResNo674 becomes operational, CONEP has determined that protocols falling within the special thematic areas of human genetics, human reproduction, indigenous populations, genetically modified organisms, and the establishment and operation of biobanks must be considered high risk. Refer to ResNo466, ResNo446, and ResNo340 for a complete listing of the special thematic areas. See also CLNo172 for additional guidance on classifying protocol thematic areas that require CONEP review (e.g., including protocols on the constitution and operation of biobanks for research purposes); CLNo34 for guidance on processing biobank development protocols electronically; and CLNo26 for information on submitting research protocols with human bodies and/or anatomical parts.

CNSResNo506 further states that at the time of obtaining accreditation, the EC (CEP) should submit a statement signed by the EC coordinator that commits the EC (CEP) to evaluating high-risk protocols at least equal to the protocol submitted to CONEP. This process also supports CONEP’s plan to decentralize the CEP/CONEP System and delegate more high-risk protocol reviews to certified ECs (CEPs). If the number of high-risk protocols exceeds the EC’s (CEP’s) operational capacity to review, then CONEP will evaluate the outstanding protocols. BRA-2 also provides helpful information on this process.

Additionally, ResNo674 notes CONEP will be solely responsible for the registration of biobank development protocols, and the research classification and modulation factors used to further characterize the protocols in BRA-34 will not be applicable. (Note: Per BRA-9, the protocol classification and processing system has not yet been implemented in BRA-34. The ClinRegs team will continue to monitor Plataforma Brasil (BRA-34) for any developments.)

Suspension and Cancellation of Accreditation

As indicated in ResNo706, an EC (CEP) or the supporting institution may request suspension of the EC’s (CEP’s) accreditation for a maximum period of 90 days, upon reasoned justification, and the suspension may be extended once, for an additional 90-day period.

Per ResNo706, the suspension of EC (CEP) accreditation consists of the temporary interruption of the receipt of new research protocols for ethical assessment. The suspended EC (CEP) must maintain monitoring of the protocols under its responsibility, whether approved or in progress, while the suspension remains. New protocols, submitted for consideration by the suspended EC (CEP), will be directed to another EC (CEP), as indicated by CONEP. CONEP’s decision to suspend the EC (CEP)'s accreditation may be appealed to CONEP within 30 days. An extension of the deadline for appeal may be requested, once, for a maximum period of 30 days, upon justification.

ResNo706 further explains that the cancellation of EC (CEP) accreditation consists of revoking the registration and removing the EC (CEP) in the CEP/CONEP System. If cancelled, CONEP will transfer the protocols to another EC (CEP) for due monitoring. Cancellation, at the request of the supporting institution, will be assessed by means of a request addressed to the CONEP Coordination, containing the reasons for the request. The cancellation decision may be appealed to CONEP within 30 days. An extension of the deadline for appeal may be requested once, for a maximum period of 30 days, upon justification. In case of cancellation, requests for new registration by the supporting institution within a period of 12 months are prohibited. See ResNo706 for detailed information on EC (CEP) accreditation suspensions and cancellations.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.  

Overview

As stated in ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, the sponsor, the designated contract research organization (CRO) (clinical research representative organization (CRPO) in Brazil), or the sponsor-investigator must apply to the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) to obtain approval for a clinical trial application (Clinical Drug Development Dossier (Dossier de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Medicamento (DDCM))) for a drug that will have all or part of its development in Brazil for registration purposes. (Note: Applications are also known as petitions in Brazil).

According to LawNo14.874 and ResNo945, research involving human beings must be subject to prior ethical analysis by research ethics committees (ECs) (Comitês de Ética em Pesquisa (CEPs)). ResNo945 explains that clinical trial applications can be submitted in parallel, however, a drug clinical trial may only be initiated after approval is obtained by both the EC (CEP) and ANVISA.

According to National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) regulations and guidelines as delineated in ResNo466 and OSNo001, the principal investigator (PI) must obtain approval from the EC (CEP). Applications with coordination or sponsorship originating outside of Brazil require additional EC (CEP) review by CONEP unless the co-sponsor is the Brazilian Government.

Note: Regulatory requirements for both the National Research Ethics Authority and CONEP will be included in the profile until the CONEP system has fully transitioned to the new national system enacted by LawNo14.874.

Regulatory Submission

Primary Petitions

As per ResNo945, the primary DDCM petition may be submitted to ANVISA at any stage of clinical drug development for one (1) or more clinical trial phases. ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual further note that the DDCM must also be filed with at least one (1) Specific Clinical Trial Dossier (Dossiê Específico de Ensaio Clínico (DEEC)) for analysis. A DEEC is defined as a collection of documents submitted as part of the Investigational Drug Development Plan (PDME) in the DDCM. DEECs must be filed in the form of individual processes for each clinical trial and linked to the respective DDCM. Per the G-DDCMManual, DEECs must be submitted as primary petitions and, therefore, will have a case number, with specific subjects for each clinical trial that is to be carried out in Brazil and that have not yet been submitted to ANVISA. Also, only DEECs from clinical trials to be carried out in Brazil should be submitted. ResNo945 further indicates that the sponsor, CRO, or sponsor-investigator may link new DEECs to the submitted DDCM at any time following the initial submission.

ResNo945 provides the following additional DDCM submission requirements:

The person responsible for submitting the DDCM to ANVISA must be the same for all subsequent petition submissions related to it
Submissions by the CRO may only be made when the sponsor does not have a head office or branch in Brazil
A DDCM submission by a sponsor-investigator must be done through the primary sponsor, and
In cases where a sponsoring investigator wishes to conduct a clinical trial with a drug that already has an approved DDCM, the sponsoring investigator, with the initial DDCM owner’s permission, may use the information previously sent, without having to resubmit all the documentation. When an authorization from the initial DDCM owner is not provided, the sponsoring investigator must submit to ANVISA all the required information through updated and indexed literature that supports the proposed development rationale
In addition, per ResNo903, when a sponsor or CRO transfers responsibility for submitting a DDCM petition and the linked specific clinical trial processes for an IP to ANVISA, the succeeding company must update the related clinical trial registration data via a petition for global transfer of responsibility for the clinical trial. See ResNo903 for additional information. See also the Submission Content section for specific documentation requirements, and the Insurance & Compensation and Manufacturing & Import sections for additional requirements related to global transfer of responsibility for the clinical trial.

See ResNo506 for more information on ANVISA’s role in reviewing and approving clinical trial applications submitted for studies using advanced therapy products (i.e., medicines for human use that are based on genes, tissues, or cells).

Secondary Petitions

As explained in the G-DDCMManual, secondary petitions must be linked to the respective specific processes. When a secondary petition is related to a DDCM, it must be filed together with the Petition Consent Form (BRA-21). Some examples of DDCM petitions include: Substantial Modification to the Investigational Product (BRA-127); Investigational Drug Development Safety Update Report (DSUR); Cancellation of DDCM on Request; Global Transfer of Responsibility for DDCM; Temporary Suspension of DDCM; Reactivation of Suspended DDCM; Investigational Drug Development Plan (PDME) Update Notification; and Investigator’s Brochure (IB) Update Notification.

Similarly, per the G-DDCMManual, secondary petitions related to DEECs must be linked to the respective clinical trial processes. Some examples of DEEC petitions include: Alteration of the Clinical Trial Submission Form (FAEC) (BRA-22); substantial amendment to clinical protocol; Annual Report on Clinical Trial Protocol Monitoring; Cancellation of Clinical Trial Protocol on Request; Global Transfer of Responsibility for Clinical Trial Protocol; Temporary Suspension of Clinical Trial Protocol; and Reactivation of Suspended Clinical Trial Protocol.

A stated in ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, for substantial protocol modifications of the investigational product (IP), the sponsor must submit to ANVISA a secondary petition linked to the corresponding DDCM. ResNo945 also indicates that non-substantial IP modifications must always be submitted to ANVISA in the next petition for substantial IP modification, or as part of the drug development safety update report (DSUR), whichever occurs first. The G-DDCMAmdmts further notes that these modifications may be made at any time after initial DDCM submission, including before ANVISA issues its final decision. See the G-DDCMAmdmts for detailed submission instructions for DDCM modifications. See also BRA-127 for the Substantial Modification of the Investigational Product form. Refer to the Submission Content section for substantial IP modification documentation requirements.

As per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, petitions for substantial amendments to clinical trial protocols must also be filed as a secondary petition linked to the corresponding DEEC. ResNo945 further explains that non-substantial clinical trial protocol amendments must always be submitted to ANVISA in the next substantial amendment petition, or as part of the final clinical trial protocol monitoring report, in cases where there are no substantial amendments by the end of the clinical trial. See the G-DDCMAmdmts for detailed submission instructions for protocol modifications. See also BRA-125 for the Substantial Amendment to Clinical Trial Protocol form. Refer to the Submission Content section for DEEC petition content requirements and substantial protocol amendment documentation requirements.

ResNo204 and BRA-14 further note that DEECs may be submitted as priority requests to ANVISA to register, amend previously registered, or request prior consent for drug submissions. However, as described in the G-DDCMManual, in cases where the DDCM or DEEC has been prioritized, under the terms of ResNo204, ResNo205, and ResNo811 (which partially amends ResNo205), prioritization does not automatically extend to secondary petitions. The company must request the prioritization of analysis at the time of petitioning each secondary petition, if applicable. For detailed information on priority petition requirements, see the Scope of Assessment and Timeline of Review sections.

See ResNo742, ResNo931 and ResNo942 (amending ResNo742), BRA-6, and BRA-7 for requirements associated with submitting DEECs linked to DDCMs for comparative bioavailability/bioequivalence studies and comparative pharmacokinetic studies with biosimilar products.

In addition, for the purposes of regulatory submission, the G-SUSARs indicates that Drug Development Safety Reports (DSURs) must be submitted as secondary electronic petitions linked to the DDCM process. The subject of petition 10825 – CLINICAL TRIALS – Safety Update Report of the Development of the Investigational Drug should be used.

As delineated in ResNo945, RegNo338, the G-DDCMManual, and BRA-122, the sponsor may also submit a request for technical analysis by the optimized procedure based on regulatory trust practices (Reliance) or by risk or complexity criteria of the clinical trial or the IP at any time, by means of a secondary petition, before ANVISA begins its technical evaluation of the corresponding DDCM petition. Per ResNo945 and RegNo338, for the purposes of admissibility for analyzing primary and secondary petitions, the related documents must have been approved by at least one (1) of the Equivalent Foreign Regulatory Authorities (Autoridades Reguladoras Estrangeiras Equivalentes (AREEs)) recognized by ANVISA. The AREE approved documents must also be the same versions as those presented to ANVISA.

The G-DDCMManual further explains that the optimization procedure concerns the documentation that may be exempted from technical analysis when the criteria for each of the specific situations are met. However, all documents required for the instruction of each type of petition or process must be submitted.

In accordance with ResNo945 and RegNo338, the G-DDCMManual and BRA-122 indicate that the applicant must file a secondary petition to request the optimized analysis procedure by Reliance using one (1) of the subject codes listed below:

12102 – Clinical Trials – Optimized analysis procedure for DEEC
12103 – Clinical Trials – Optimized analysis procedure for Substantial Amendment to the Clinical Protocol
12104 – Clinical Trials – Optimized analysis procedure for Approval in the Process of the DDCM
11634 – Clinical Trials – Optimized Analysis Procedure for Substantial Modification to IP
BRA-122 also explains that only a single subject code (12102) is used to submit a request to ANVISA to apply the optimized analysis procedure by Reliance for the DEEC. Additionally, per the G-DDCMManual and BRA-122, the petitioning system does not allow a secondary petition to be linked to another secondary petition. Since requests for the application of the optimized analysis procedure must be made through secondary petitions, and petitions for substantial IP modifications and clinical protocol amendments are also secondary petitions, requests referring to these petitions must be linked to the DDCM and DEEC by subject codes 11634 and 12103, respectively. Therefore, in the case of a DDCM petition and linked DEECs, for both petitions to be analyzed according to the optimized procedure, a company must make the request in parallel and individually for each of the petitions (codes 12102 and 12104), including for each related secondary petition, if applicable. Refer to the G-DDCMManual and BRA-122 for additional information. See also the Scope of Assessment section for detailed optimized analysis procedure requirements by Reliance or based on risk assessment of the clinical trial or IP.

For requests to ANVISA to apply the optimized analysis procedure based on risk assessment using IP experience, the G-DDCMManual indicates that there is no specific subject code. Therefore, a company may request the application of the optimized analysis procedure by either one (1) of these options:

In the Clinical Trial Submission Form (FAEC) (BRA-22), marking the option "(X) to the question, “We request the application of the optimized analysis procedure, pursuant to Article 8 of IN No. 338/2024", or answering "yes" to the question "Request for the application of the optimized analysis procedure (based on the risk assessment supported by the experience of using the investigational product).”
In the Petition Form for Substantial Modification of the Investigational Product (BRA-127), answering "yes" to the question "Request for the application of the optimized analysis procedure (based on the risk assessment supported by the experience of using the IP), pursuant to Article 8 of IN No. 338/2024".
Electronic Filing

Per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, the original DDCM and all related processes and petitions (e.g., secondary petitions and DEEC(s)) should be submitted electronically. ResNo947 also notes that documents to be filed with ANVISA must be submitted exclusively electronically via the agency’s electronic petitioning systems for filing documents, except in specified cases. BRA-38 specifies electronic petitioning is carried out via the Solicita Electronic Petition Request System (BRA-56). See BRA-47 and BRA-38 for instructions on how to login to the Solicita System.

The G-DDCMManual, and BRA-58 explain that when the DDCM has been submitted, the sponsor is then required to electronically file all the documents corresponding to the initial DDCM petition’s subject code checklist. As described in BRA-75, the sponsor must electronically attach all the documents required in the related DDCM checklist (accessed online via BRA-56) that corresponds to one (1) of the following related subject codes: 10748, 10749, 10750, 10751, 10752, 10753, 10754, and 10755. ResNo945 also specifies that the documentation presented must allow for textual searches, copying, and contain bookmarks and hyperlinks that facilitate navigation. Refer to BRA-47 and BRA-59 for instructions for submitting the DDCM checklist documents via BRA-56. Additionally, per the G-DDCMManual, for DEEC petition electronic submissions, one (1) file needs to be attached for each item contained on the corresponding checklist. DEECs can be submitted to ANVISA using one (1) of the following subject codes: 10482, 10479, 10476, 10773, 10483, 10478, 10477, 10774. See the G-DDCMManual and BRA-47 for additional DEEC petition submission instructions. See also ResNo947 for details on ANVISA’S electronic filing requirements.

As per ResNo857, BRA-47, and BRA-43, once the sponsor has completed the process of submitting a DDCM request, ANVISA’s Solicita Electronic Petition Request System (BRA-56) generates a document known as the Union Collection Guide (Guia de Recolhimento da União (GRU)). The GRU is the primary method used to generate the Health Surveillance Inspection Fee (Taxa de Fiscalização de Vigilância Sanitária (TFVS)) fees. ResNo857 explains that petitions subject to TFVS will only be eligible for filing after confirmation of full corresponding payment. Once the full TFVS payment is confirmed, the electronic petitions will be automatically filed. (See the Regulatory Fees section for detailed information on the payment process.)

ResNo857 further states that if a petition is filed without due payment of the TFVS fee, the request and the documentation will be returned to the sponsor. BRA-43 specifies that ANVISA will accept the following documents as proof of payment from the sponsor:

Presentation of the original GRU receipt collected electronically, which must be accompanied by the original electronic banking network payment receipt
Presentation of the original GRU receipt collected from the banking network, which must contain the original receipt stamp for authentication
The transaction number issued by ANVISA’s Solicita Electronic Petition Request System (BRA-56)
BRA-59 explains that once the fee is paid, a reference (transaction) number is generated that will be required for the subsequent submission of the associated checklist documents. The processing of this request can take up to two (2) days, which is the time given to the banking network to clear the payment. Refer to BRA-59 for additional instructions. See also BRA-47 for step-by-step instructions on how to submit the initial DDCM petition and TFVS fee, and BRA-21 for the DDCM Petition Consent Form. See BRA-38 for additional information on accessing ANVISA’s electronic petitioning request systems.

As indicated in the G-DDCMManual, ANVISA recommends that the DDCM and associated documents (especially the clinical protocol, the PDME, and the investigator’s brochure) be submitted in Portuguese. If a translated version of the submission is not provided, ANVISA’s technical area reviewer may issue a requirement for the sponsor to provide a free translation of the submitted documentation. ResNo947 also states that documents filed with ANVISA must be presented in Portuguese, however, documents submitted in English and Spanish will also be accepted, and a request for translation of the documents may be submitted. When translation is necessary, in the absence of a specific rule requiring translation in the sworn version, a free translation may be accepted.

See also BRA-19 and BRA-90 for guidance on scheduling pre-submission meetings with ANVISA’s Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (Coordenação de Pesquisa Clínica em Medicamentos e Produtos Biológicos (COPEC)) to discuss the clinical development of a drug (e.g., DDCM, secondary petition, or DEEC), or a meeting to discuss a clinical trial application previously submitted to ANVISA. BRA-90 also provides the items required for scheduling each type of meeting and the corresponding request form to be submitted.

In addition, per ResNo763, which modifies ResNo205, ANVISA has suspended the requirement for the sponsor to hold a pre-submission meeting to present a rare disease DDCM or amended DDCM. The pre-submission meeting is optional, if the sponsor deems necessary, and ANVISA should hold the meeting within 60 days following this request. Refer to ResNo205 and ResNo811 (which partially amends ResNo205) for additional submission documentation requirements.

Ethics Review Submission

National Research Ethics Authority

According to LawNo14.874, the investigator is responsible for submitting a research project to the EC (CEP) for approval. The submission should include the research documentation, including any amendments.

National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP)

Per ResNo466 and OSNo001, the PI must obtain approval from the EC (CEP). The PI is responsible for submitting the EC (CEP) application online via Plataforma Brasil (BRA-34). If applicable, the PI must also submit the application to CONEP for additional review and approval via BRA-34. Applications with coordination or sponsorship originating outside of Brazil require additional EC (CEP) review by CONEP, unless the co-sponsor is the Brazilian Government. See BRA-33 for the most current Plataforma Brazil EC (CEP) and investigator manuals. Please refer to Scope of Review and Oversight of Ethics Committee sections for detailed information on CONEP responsibilities and other studies requiring CONEP approval. See also CLNo183 for instructions on linking investigator/institutions to the responsible EC (CEP) in submissions; CLNo062 for guidance on submitting documentation required for CONEP analysis; and CLNo046 for instructions on submitting requests for inclusion/exclusion of research center(s).

Per OSNo001, the investigator is required to submit the research protocol in Portuguese to the CEP/CONEP System via BRA-34, and when applicable, accompanied by the originals in the foreign language.

In addition, per OSNo001, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the PI is required to submit a list of the participating institutions and the associated protocols as part of the research protocol package sent to the EC (CEP) for review.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.  

Regulatory Authority Requirements

Clinical Drug Development Dossier (DDCM)

As delineated in ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, the following documentation must be submitted to the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) to file a clinical trial application (Clinical Drug Development Dossier (Dossier de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Medicamento (DDCM))) via the Solicita Electronic Petition Request System (BRA-56) (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

DDCM Petition Consent Form (BRA-21)
Declaration of commitment to distribute to clinical trial centers and use investigational products (IPs) only after authorization from the corresponding DDCM and Specific Clinical Trial Dossier (Dossiê Específico de Ensaio Clínico (DEEC)), when import is authorized prior to publication of the approval/rejection in the Official Gazette of the Union (Diário Oficial da União (DOU))
Investigational Drug Development Plan (PDME)
Investigator’s Brochure (IB)
Investigational Medicinal Product Dossier (IMPD) (including information on active pharmaceutical ingredient (API), investigational drug, and placebo and modified comparator drug)
DEEC (see detailed requirements listed below)
Declarations on compliance with Good Clinical Practice (GCP), Good Laboratory Practice (GLP), and Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP)
GCP Certificate or equivalent document for the completed or ongoing clinical trials must be attached to the DDCM, if applicable
Declaration of commitment to distribute and use IPs only after authorization from DDCM and corresponding initial and subsequent DEEC(s). This document should only be attached to the DDCM if the sponsor is interested in receiving the Import Document (DI) prior to the DDCM's analysis and approval. If the company has attached this to the DDCM, the DI will be issued for early importation both for the initial DEECs submitted together with the DDCM, and for the clinical trials submitted after the approval of the DDCM.
Additionally, per ResNo903, when a sponsor or contract research organization (CRO) (clinical research representative organization (CRPO) in Brazil) transfers responsibility for submitting a DDCM and the linked specific clinical trial processes for an IP to ANVISA, the succeeding company must update the related clinical trial registration data via a petition for global transfer of responsibility for the clinical trial. The petition must be accompanied by the following documents:

Petition Consent Form duly completed and signed (BRA-21)
Declaration of the corporate or commercial transaction carried out (see Declaration form in Annex I of ResNo903)
Specific Clinical Trial Dossier (DEEC)

Per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, the DEEC petition submission should include the following:

Clinical Trial Submission Form (FAEC) (BRA-22)
Clinical trial protocol containing the minimum information described in the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline E6(R2) (BRA-28) and its updates (Please note that the ICH Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) (BRA-121) was finalized on January 6, 2025)
Statistical analysis plan (PAE), at least in draft version, in the case of phase 3 clinical trials and adaptive clinical trials
Opinion of any country/region's scientific advisory board, if any, on the clinical trial
Pediatric investigation plan of any country/region, if any
Sample investigational drug label
Proof of registration of the clinical trial, in the same version of the clinical protocol submitted to ANVISA, in the registration database of the World Health Organization (WHO)’s International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) (BRA-52) or any other registry recognized by the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) (Note: The Brazilian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Brasileiro de Ensaios Clínicos (ReBEC) (BRA-45) is a primary registry in the ICTRP network.); and, if proof of registration is not available at the time of DEEC submission, it must be submitted together with the notification of commencement of the clinical trial.)
Substantial IP Modifications

Per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, for substantial modifications of the IP, the sponsor must submit to ANVISA a secondary petition linked to the corresponding DDCM. ResNo945 states that the petition for substantial IP modification must contain a copy of the previously approved IMPD or Investigational Product Dossier (DPI), containing the proposed modifications highlighted (track-changes format) and a table comparing the current situation with the proposed changes, the justifications for each change, and the assessment of the impacts of the modifications on clinical development. ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual also indicate that if there is a GMP certificate or equivalent document for the IP, it must be attached to the petition for substantial IP modification. In addition, the Petition Form for Substantial Modification to the Product under investigation (BRA-127) and other information in accordance with each proposed modification must be attached to the petition. See the G-DDCMAmdmts for detailed submission instructions.

ResNo945 also indicates that non-substantial IP modifications must always be submitted to ANVISA in the next petition for substantial IP modification, or as part of the drug development safety update report (DSUR), whichever occurs first.

Substantial Protocol Amendments

As per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, petitions for substantial amendments to clinical trial protocols must also be filed electronically as a secondary petition linked to the corresponding DEEC. ResNo945 further indicates that the petition must contain a copy of the previously approved clinical protocol with the proposed modifications highlighted (track-changes format) and a table comparing the current situation with the proposed changes, the justifications for each change and the assessment of the impacts on clinical development. In addition, clean and track changes versions of the updated Clinical Trial Submission Form (FAEC) (BRA-22) must be attached to the petition, along with the new clean version of the clinical protocol. See the G-DDCMAmdmts for detailed submission instructions for protocol amendments. See also BRA-125 for the Substantial Amendment to Clinical Trial Protocol form.

ResNo945 further explains that non-substantial clinical trial protocol amendments must always be submitted to ANVISA in the next substantial amendment petition, or as part of the final clinical trial protocol monitoring report, in cases where there are no substantial amendments by the end of the clinical trial.

See ResNo903 for additional information. See also the Submission Process, Insurance & Compensation, and Manufacturing & Import sections for additional requirements related to global transfer of responsibility for the clinical trial.

Optimized Analysis Procedure (Reliance) Submissions

Pursuant to ResNo945, to comply with the documentation requirements for the optimized analysis procedure by Reliance, the sponsor must present official proof issued by an Equivalent Foreign Regulatory Authority (Autoridade Regulatória Estrangeira Equivalente (AREE)) regarding the clinical protocol approval or clinical protocol amendment, or, official proof of the DDCM or substantial IP modification of the IMPD or Investigational Product Dossier (DPI). In the absence of this official document, a declaration signed by the sponsor's legal and technical representatives must be presented with due justification and additional information, if applicable.

Per RegNo338, ANVISA will provide a specific petition characterization form for the sponsor to complete for the proper identification of situations in which the optimized analysis procedure is supported by experience using the IP. Among the documents required for the instruction of each type of petition, the optimized analysis procedure based on risk assessment may be applied to the documents listed below:

IB, when dealing with the risk categories defined in the low-risk clinical trial categories for medicine used as registered in Brazil or by an AREE, without substantial modifications; and fixed-dose combinations with registered active pharmaceutical ingredients already used concomitantly in medical practice, for the same indication, target population, and dosage regimen (without clinically significant pharmacokinetic and/or pharmacodynamic interaction)
IMPD or DPI, when dealing with low-risk clinical trial categories and moderate risk clinical trial categories for new therapeutic indication, and/or target population, and/or dosage regimen
RegNo338 further indicates that ANVISA will review the following documents based on the optimized analysis procedure by Reliance:

IB, except in the case of complex clinical trials, prophylactic and therapeutic vaccines and biosimilar products
API and IMPD or DPI
Clinical trial protocol, except in the case of complex clinical trials, prophylactic and therapeutic vaccines and biosimilar products
See also BRA-124 for the Form for Declaration of Compliance with the Requirements for the Admissibility of the Optimized Analysis Procedure by Regulatory Trust (Reliance) to be completed by the sponsor’s legal representative or technical manager.

See also BRA-42 for additional information on ANVISA protocol filing requirements.

Ethics Committee Requirements

National Research Ethics Authority

According to LawNo14.874, investigators are responsible for submitting research documentation, including any amendments, for research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)) approval.

No other information is currently available regarding EC (CEP)/National Research Ethics Authority submission documentation requirements.

National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP)

As per OMREC and OSNo001, the CONEP requires sponsors to submit the following documentation online via BRA-34 (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Cover Sheet for Research Involving Human Beings (completed by investigator in Plataforma Brasil)
Clinical research protocol (in Portuguese)
Background, justification, and registration in the country of origin for drug and device health products
Description of materials, methods, rationale, expected results, and bibliography
Critical risk and benefit analysis
Duration
Responsibilities of investigator, institution, and sponsor
Criteria for project suspension or termination
Location of implementation of various project steps
Necessary infrastructure and agreement of the institution
Statement of Commitment from the principal investigator (PI)
Informed consent form (ICF) (See Informed Consent topic for additional information)
Detailed research financial budget and investigator remuneration
Ownership of information
Characteristics of the participant population, and justification for the use of vulnerable groups
Number of participants locally and globally (multicenter)
Description of methods that affect research participants
Sources of material and details of the specific collection
Recruitment plans, inclusion and exclusion criteria
PI/investigator(s) Curriculum Vitaes (CVs)
Research project schedule
Foreign Research or Foreign Cooperation documentation (commitments and advantages for research participants and the country; identification of the national investigator and co-responsible institution; EC approval document in the country of origin or justification; response to the need for personnel training in Brazil; and lists of participating centers abroad and in Brazil)
Research with new drug, vaccine, and diagnostic test document requirements (current clinical trial phase and demonstration of compliance with previous clinical trial phases; drug substance registration in the country of origin and status of research; IB; clinical information from previous trial phases; justification for using placebo or wash out period; access to the drug, if its superiority is proven; investigator’s statement of commitment; justification for inclusion of healthy participants; forms of recruitment)
See OMREC and OSNo001 for detailed CEP/National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) System submission requirements. See also BRA-33 for the most current Plataforma Brazil CEP and investigator manuals.

Clinical Protocol

As delineated in OMREC and OSNo001, the clinical protocol should include the following elements:

Protocol summary
Sponsor or authorized representative name and contact information
PI CV and contact information
PI statement of responsibility
IP description (See Investigational Products topic for detailed coverage of this subject)
Form, dosage, route, method, and frequency of administration; and treatment period
Summary of potential risks and known benefits to research participants
Trial objectives and purpose
Trial design, random selection method, and blinding level
Participant selection/withdrawal
Participant treatment
Safety evaluation
Adverse event reporting requirements (See Safety Reporting section for additional information)
Statistics and methods to track trial data
Sponsor specifications for direct access to source data/documents
Quality control/quality assurance procedures and practices
Ethical considerations
Data management and record maintenance
Financing and insurance details
Publication policy
For complete protocol requirements, refer to OMREC and OSNo001.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile. 
On November 11, 2025, the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) published RDC 997/2025, which states that primary and secondary clinical research petitions for medicines and biological products that meet the criteria for applying the optimized Reliance review procedure under ResNo945 and RegNo338 will be allocated to a specific queue. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.   
Overview

As stated in ResNo945, clinical trial applications can be submitted in parallel, however, a drug clinical trial may only be initiated after approval is obtained by both the research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)) and the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)).

Regulatory Authority Approval

As set forth in LawNo14.874, ANVISA’s analysis of the primary petitions for clinical trials with human beings (Clinical Drug Development Dossiers (Dossiês de Desenvolvimento de Medicamentos Clínicos (DDCMs))) must be completed within 90 business days. If no response is provided after regular receipt of the primary DDCM petition, clinical development may be initiated, provided that it contains the relevant ethical approvals. ResNo945 further specifies that upon receipt of the primary DDCM and the Specific Clinical Trial Dossier (Dossiê Específico de Ensaio Clínico (DEEC)) petitions, ANVISA has 90 business days, counting from the date of issuance of the DEEC document, to evaluate the application. If the agency fails to issue a response within 90 days of receipt, the DDCM and respective DEEC will be released after the deadline, and clinical development can begin after the relevant ethical approvals have been obtained. The 90-day deadline also applies to primary petitions for new DEECs subsequently linked to the DDCM, and to secondary petitions for substantial modifications to the investigational product (IP) and substantial amendments to the clinical protocol. See Scope of Assessment section for detailed DDCM and DEEC submission requirements.

Additionally, per ResNo945, ANVISA’s analysis of the DDCM will only occur after the filing of at least one (1) DEEC, which must be carried out within 15 business days from the DDCM’s issue date. The absence of the DEEC, after the 15-day deadline, will result in the rejection of the DDCM without technical analysis, except in cases of clinical trials involving more than one (1) investigational product (IP), whose DEEC has already been linked to one of the DDCMs of these drugs.

LawNo14.874 and ResNo945 further explain that ANVISA may request, one (1) time only, by means of a technical requirement, additional clarifications and documents during the analysis of primary DDCM and DEEC petitions and secondary petitions for substantial IP modification or substantial clinical protocol amendment. ANVISA’s technical requirement will result in the suspension of the analysis deadlines, and its interruption is prohibited. ResNo945 also notes that the deadline for the sponsor’s compliance with this technical requirement is 30 business days, counting from the date of confirmation of receipt by ANVISA.

In addition, per BRA-122, petitions submitted to request an ANVISA evaluation using the optimized analysis procedure based on regulatory trust practices (Reliance) that have not been analyzed within ANVISA’s 90-day deadline, will be released due to the expiration of the term in accordance with ResNo945 and LawNo14.874. The petitions will have their status updated to “Added to process”. See BRA-122 for additional information. See the Scope of Assessment and Submission Process sections for detailed criteria and procedures to submit optimized analysis procedure petitions.

See also BRA-60 for details on the median analysis timelines for ANVISA to complete its technical review of prioritized and ordinary petitions.

Priority Submissions

As delineated in ResNo204, ANVISA is required to issue a final decision on applications for registration and post-registration of drugs classified as a priority within 120 days for new drug registration requests and in 60 days for post-registration petitions. The deadlines will be counted from the date of submission, and any requests for clarification or additional technical requirements will result in suspending the counting of deadlines until the requests have been met. See also BRA-40 for additional information on ANVISA drug registration requirements.

In addition, per ResNo204, ANVISA must first issue a written opinion letter within 45 calendar days from the first working day following protocol submission for priority petitions in the following categories:

Prior consent petitions in the clinical development dossier process
Prior consent petitions in the drug research process
Secondary petitions referring to the prioritized primary process
Refer to ResNo204 and ResNo811 (which partially amends ResNo204) for detailed information on DEEC submissions.

In addition, as set forth in ResNo205, for a clinical trial with medicines for rare diseases to be conducted in Brazil, ANVISA must evaluate a DDCM, DEEC, or substantial modification due to inclusion of a clinical trial protocol within 30 days after submission, and will issue a notification requesting additional information or a statement of conclusion. ANVISA will evaluate secondary petitions referring to a DDCM, DEEC, or substantial modification due to inclusion of a clinical trial protocol according to the same timeline. Refer to ResNo205 for detailed submission requirements and deadlines.

See also ResNo811 (which partially amends ResNo205) and BRA-14 for additional information on priority petitions. See the Scope of Assessment section for further information on priority submissions.

Ethics Committee Approval

New National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings

LawNo14.874 introduces the National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings (Sistema Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa com Seres Humanos). The system consists of the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s National Research Ethics Authority and the ECs (CEPs), which must be accredited by the National Research Ethics Authority. In this framework, the ECs (CEPs) are solely responsible for the ethical review of clinical trial protocols involving human participants. During the transition to the new system, the current National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) system will continue to be implemented and described in this profile. The ClinRegs team will provide additional information on the implementation of LawNo14.874 as it becomes available. See also BRA-117 for additional information.

National Research Ethics Authority

As set forth in LawNo14.874, the EC (CEP) must conduct a research ethics review and issue an opinion within 30 business days from the date of acceptance of all research documents. The EC (CEP) must accept or deny these documents within 10 business days from the date of submission. Additionally, before issuing the opinion, the EC (CEP) may request additional information or documents from the investigator or research sponsor or make adjustments to the research documentation, for up to 20 business days. The investigator will have 10 working days, extendable for an additional 10 working days upon justification, to meet the demands requested by the EC (CEP), and the study analysis process may be canceled in case of non-compliance with the deadline.

LawNo14.874 further explains that the decision contained in the EC (CEP)’s opinion may be appealed, in the first instance, within 30 business days, to the EC (CEP) itself that issued the opinion, and in the second and final instance, within 30 business days, to the National Research Ethics Authority. The appeals provided will be decided by the National Research Ethics Authority within 30 business days. See the Scope of Review section for details on the EC (CEP) review processes. See also BRA-117 for additional information.

Additionally, per LawNo14.874, the EC (CEP) opinion regarding research of strategic interest to the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s Unified Health System (Sistema Único de Saúde (SUS)) (BRA-53) and relevant to responding to public health emergencies will be issued within a period of 15 business days from the date of receipt of the research documents.

National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP)

As delineated in OSNo001 and BRA-91, the institutional EC (CEP) is required to issue an initial report in 30 days from the date the principal investigator (PI) submits an application for review. The CEP’s review of the protocol documentation for completeness should be accomplished within 10 days following submission. Per BRA-91, the review period must be counted from the date the project entered “Ethical Assessment” (i.e., after going through the validation of documents which takes around 10 days and when the Certificate of Presentation for Ethical Assessment (Certificado de Apresentação de Apreciação Ética) (CAAE)) is issued). In addition, per BRA-91, if the project needs to be reviewed by CONEP, the deadline is 15 days for document validation, and 45 days for ethical assessment. If these deadlines have expired, BRA-91 further suggests that the investigator responsible for the research project, contact the CEP to request explanations and, in parallel, send a notification to CONEP (conep.cep@saude.gov.br) requesting a case investigation. Additionally, per CLNo040, if an amended project needs to go through CONEP’s appraisal, the deadline for document validation is 15 days and for ethical review, 45 days.

Per CLNo10, in the event that EC (CEP) activities are temporarily suspended due to a strike or institutional recess, the EC (CEP) must notify CONEP of measures to be adopted to ensure the continuity of protocol processing for ethical assessment according to the deadlines delineated above per OSNo001, specifically, 10 days for document checking for completeness and 30 days to release the opinion.

Per CLNo29, in the case of an appeal, only the investigator responsible for the protocol, which had a substantiated opinion of non-approval, may submit a request to the CEP/CONEP System via Platforma Brasil (BRA-34). The appeal must be filed within 30 calendar days, counting from the first day following the issuance of the substantiated opinion of non-approval. Appeals submitted to the EC (CEP) will be reviewed and a substantiated opinion analyzing the appeal will be issued within 30 calendar days following receipt. If the EC (CEP) considers the requirements and justifications presented in the appeal to be appropriate in order to continue the ethical analysis, the appeal will be approved, or pending approval, if the protocol requires adjustments prior to approval. However, if the appeal is not approved by the EC (CEP), the investigator may appeal to CONEP. CONEP, in turn, has a deadline of up to 45 days after receiving the appeal to issue a substantiated opinion of approved, pending, or not approved, when evaluating the appeal in relation to the substantiated opinion issued by the EC (CEP). If CONEP does not approve the appeal, the investigator, upon receiving the non-approval opinion from CONEP, may file an appeal directly to CONEP itself. From an analysis of the resources submitted to the EC (CEP) and/or CONEP, CONEP may issue an “Approve with Recommendation” opinion to the EC (CEP), when applicable. If CONEP does not approve the appeal, the processing of the appeal is terminated, the research protocol is archived, and no other appeal requests will be permitted.

See the Submission Process section for CEP/CONEP System submission requirements.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
Overview

New National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings

LawNo14.874 introduces the National System of Ethics in Research with Human Beings (Sistema Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa com Seres Humanos). The system consists of the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s National Research Ethics Authority and the research ethics committees (ECs) (Comitês de Ética em Pesquisa (CEPs)), which must be accredited by the National Research Ethics Authority. In this framework, the ECs (CEPs) are solely responsible for the ethical review of clinical trial protocols involving human participants. During the transition to the new system, the current National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) system will continue to be implemented and described in this profile. The ClinRegs team will provide additional information on the implementation of LawNo14.874 as it becomes available. See also BRA-117 for additional information.

In accordance with ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, a clinical trial can only commence after the sponsor, the designated contract research organization (CRO) (clinical research representative organization (CRPO) in Brazil), or the sponsor-investigator receives clinical trial application (Clinical Drug Development Dossier (Dossiê de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Medicamento (DDCM))) approval from the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)). According to LawNo14.874, ResNo945, ResNo466, and OSNo001, research involving human beings is also subject to prior ethical analysis by research ethics committees (ECs) (Comitês de Ética em Pesquisa (CEPs)). ResNo945 states that a drug clinical trial may only be initiated after approval is obtained by both the EC (CEP) and ANVISA.

Also, according to ResNo466 and OSNo001, applications with coordination or sponsorship originating outside Brazil require an additional review and approval by CONEP, unless the co-sponsor is the Brazilian Government. See the Scope of Review and Oversight of Ethics Committees sections for detailed information on National Research Ethics Authority and CONEP responsibilities and other studies requiring CONEP approval. No waiting period is required following the sponsor’s receipt of these approvals.

In addition, per ResNo945 and G-DDCMManual, the sponsor or the designated CRO is required to obtain an import license from ANVISA for the shipment of the investigational product (IP) to be used in the trial. (See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information).

Per BRA-65, Brazil is a member of the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). ResNo945 indicates that Brazil has formally adopted the ICH’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28) and its updates. (Please note that the ICH Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) (BRA-121) was finalized on January 6, 2025.) ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual also specify that clinical trials should be conducted in compliance with BRA-28 and its updates.

LawNo14.874 and ResNo466 also state that the ethical analysis of research involving human beings should comply with good clinical practice (GCP) and ethical and scientific principles. Further, per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, clinical trials must be conducted in accordance with Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) or equivalent standards, including the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)’s Principles on GLP (BRA-15). Refer to BRA-15 for additional information on GLP requirements.

ResNo945 further states that the forms indicating the start and end date of the clinical trial in Brazil must be filed as a secondary petition to the corresponding Specific Clinical Trial Dossier (Dossiê Específico de Ensaio Clínico (DEEC)) process, within 30 business days after each start and end date. (See Clinical Trial Start Date Form in Brazil (BRA-25)).

Clinical Trial Agreement

As per LawNo14.874, the sponsor is responsible for establishing the contract between the parties involved in the research. Prior to initiating the trial, as described in BRA-28, the sponsor must sign an agreement between all involved parties, including between the investigators, the institution, the EC (CEP), and the CRO, to ensure full compliance with the regulatory requirements. In addition, the sponsor should obtain the investigator’s/institution's agreement:

To conduct the trial in compliance with GCP, with the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and given approval/favorable opinion by the EC (CEP)
To comply with procedures for data recording and reporting
To permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
To retain the trial-related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution these documents are no longer needed
The sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement. In addition, per ResNo945, any trial-related functions that are transferred to a CRO must also be specified in writing in a document signed by the sponsor and CRO. In the case of delegating responsibilities and activities, a written document must also be signed between the parties.

Clinical Trial Registration

As per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, the sponsor must register the clinical trial in a registry listed on the World Health Organization (WHO)’s International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) (BRA-52) or any other registry recognized by the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE). According to BRA-52, the Brazilian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Brasileiro de Ensaios Clínicos (ReBEC)) (BRA-45) is a primary registry in the ICTRP network. See also BRA-45 and BRA-46 for further information about ReBEC. If proof of registration is not available at the time of the DEEC submission, it must be submitted together with the Start of Clinical Trial Notification Form in Brazil (BRA-25).

In addition, per BRA-32, ANVISA has developed a clinical trials search tool to obtain detailed information about scientific/academic research or clinical trials authorized by the agency to support the registration of medicines since 2015. The Clinical Trials (Ensaios Clínicos) tool may be accessed via ANVISA’s Consultation System webpage (BRA-44), which provides public information about the status of each clinical trial, the trial location, and the investigators responsible for conducting the trial. See BRA-32 and BRA-129 for additional instructions on searching BRA-44.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.  

Safety Reporting Definitions

In accordance with LawNo14.874, the ResNo945, the G-SUSARs, the AESafetyManual, and CLNo13, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Brazil’s safety reporting requirements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Adverse Event/Experience (AE) – Any adverse medical occurrence in a research participant to whom a drug product was administered, and which does not necessarily bear a causal relationship to the treatment
Adverse Drug Reaction or Adverse Reaction (ADR) – A harmful and unintentional response attributed to a drug and which occurs at doses normally used for the prophylaxis, diagnosis, or therapy of disease, or for the modification of physiological function
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) – Any adverse medical occurrence with an investigational product (IP) that at any dose results in death, risk of death, persistent or significant disability, congenital anomaly/birth defect and situations that require or extend patient hospitalization
Suspected Serious, Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction (SUSAR) – An adverse reaction that is simultaneously serious and unexpected, with the reasonable possibility of a causal relationship between the investigational drug and active comparator. One whose nature or severity is inconsistent with the IP (i.e., the investigator’s brochure (IB), Safety Information Summary (SIR) or package insert)
Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

As set forth in LawNo14.874, the investigator should promptly communicate to the sponsor, the health authority, the research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa) (CEP)), and the National Research Ethics Authority all serious or unexpected AEs. ResNo945, the G-SUSARs, and the AESafetyManual specify that the investigator must inform the sponsor within 24 hours of all SAEs from the date of knowledge of the event. ResNo945 further explains that investigators must monitor and report to the sponsor, in accordance with the good clinical practice (GCP) and the study protocol, the occurrence of all AEs, including those that come to their attention after the end of the clinical trial. The investigators must also provide any requested information and express their opinion regarding the causality between the AE and the IP. Per the G-SUSARs, upon becoming aware of an AE, the investigator should classify it for causality, severity, intensity, and expected/unexpectedness as per Annex 1 in the G-SUSARs. Further, if the investigator becomes aware of an AE after the completion or termination of the clinical trial, and there is suspicion of a possible causal relationship with the IP, the sponsor should be informed as soon as possible.

As explained in the G-SUSARs, the investigator is also responsible for adopting immediate safety measures to protect the clinical trial participant against any imminent risk, and for communicating to the sponsor the occurrence of all AEs. The participant affected by an AE should receive appropriate care and safety measures until resolution or stabilization of their clinical condition, as described in the clinical protocol. The AESafetyManual further states the investigator(s) should treat all participants who incur AEs/ADRs and assist them until the situation is resolved. In the event of a participant’s death, the investigator must provide the sponsor and the EC (CEP) with any additional requested information (e.g., autopsy reports and terminal medical reports).

LawNo14.874 further specifies that the confidentiality of technical research information must be lifted when necessary for the analysis of SAEs. In the event of an SAE, the participant, their legal representatives, or their successors may disclose details relating to the former's participation in the research. Also, per the G-SUSARs, in the event of a possible SUSAR, the investigator should only break the concealment of treatment assignment for safety reasons, if the breaking of blinding is relevant to the safety of the trial participant, when immediate action needs to be taken.

Sponsor Responsibilities

In accordance with LawNo14.874, the sponsor is responsible for:

Promptly notifying the investigator, the institution, the competent ethical review entities, and ANVISA, about discoveries that may adversely affect the safety of the research participant, compromise the conduct of the research or affect the approval granted by the EC (CEP)
In the case of clinical trials, issuing reports on serious or unexpected ADRs to the IPs, notifying the institutions and investigators involved and ANVISA
Promptly notifying ANVISA of all serious or unexpected AEs whose causality is possible, probable, or defined in relation to the IP
ResNo945 and the G-SUSARs also state that the sponsor is required to report SUSARs to ANVISA and is permitted to delegate the reporting responsibility to the contract research organization (CRO) (clinical research representative organization (CRPO) in Brazil). In the case of sponsor-reported SUSARs, where the investigator’s interpretation differs from that of the sponsor, both reports should be submitted with their respective justifications. Per ResNo945, SUSAR notifications to ANVISA must be made independently of the submission of the investigator’s brochure (IB), amendments, reports, or early termination of the clinical trial. The G-SUSARs further notes that, as a joint action to submit SUSAR notifications, the sponsor must also inform the investigators involved in the clinical trial about the SUSARs and adopt the necessary measures to update the safety documents, such as the IB, drug package insert (in the case of a registered drug), and other related documents. While the IB is not updated, it is necessary to notify additional occurrences (follow-ups) of SUSARs to ANVISA. (See Quality Requirements section for detailed IB requirements)

ResNo945 and the G-SUSARs also state that if there is a possibility that an event may be a SUSAR, the sponsor must break the blinding for notification to ANVISA, and the break must only be in relation to the designation of the participant who was affected by the SUSAR. Where possible, the blinding should be preserved to those responsible for the analysis and interpretation of study results and those responsible for continuing the clinical trial, such as study managers, monitors, and investigators. Therefore, these professionals must continue to receive SUSARs blindly.

As per ResNo945, when an event is related to the disease and represents a primary efficacy outcome of a clinical trial, the protocol must clearly define the event in question and will not be subject to notification. If the event described is characterized as a SUSAR, it must be reported, as it may require a possible change in the safety profile. Medication errors, pregnancy, or uses not foreseen in the protocol, including misuse and abuse of the product under investigation, are subject to the same reporting obligations as ADRs. In the case of pregnancy, the investigator and the sponsor must accompany the mother and child. The G-SUSARs also states any pregnancy that occurs in a participant during a clinical trial should be followed until its outcome, and the baby should be followed for the necessary period. See the Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates section for additional information on this population.

As per ResNo945, the sponsor should ensure all relevant information pertaining to SUSARs (referred to as fatal or life-threatening SAEs/SADRs by the AESafetyManual) occurring in Brazil is documented and electronically reported to ANIVSA within a maximum of seven (7) calendar days after first knowledge. ResNo945 indicates that additional information on the monitoring of SUSAR events should be included in the assessment within eight (8) calendar days from the notification date. Additionally, per ResNo945 and the AESafetyManual, the sponsor must notify ANVISA of any other SUSARs which are not fatal or life-threatening, within 15 calendar days from the date of first knowledge. Per the G-SUSARs, for clinical studies that are already in progress and have been previously approved, the notifications must be adequate to the requirements set forth in ResNo945.

Per the AESafetyManual, AEs/ADRs and SAEs/SADRs do not need to be reported to ANVISA under the above timelines when they occur outside of Brazil or are defined in the protocol as a primary or secondary outcome. Additionally, SAEs/SADRs that are categorized as Unlikely, Conditional/Unclassified, or Unassessable/Unclassifiable do not need to be reported under the above timelines. The sponsor should classify all AEs/ADRs and SAEs/SADRs according to the World Health Organization’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre (WHO-UMC)’s standardized causality assessment system (BRA-31). The recommended criterion to categorize each event is as follows: Certain, Probable/Likely, Possible, Unlikely, Conditional/Unclassified, and Unassessable/Unclassifiable.

In addition, per ResNo945 and the G-SUSARs, the sponsor must systematically collect, monitor, and evaluate all AEs, including non-serious AEs, that occur throughout clinical development and be responsible for the safety of clinical trial participants. ResNo945 explains that safety information originating from other countries where clinical development is taking place must be communicated to the ANVISA if it implies a change in the benefit-risk profile of the experimental drug, including safety actions taken by other agencies. The sponsor must also inform the investigators involved in the clinical trial about SUSARs and adopt procedures for updating the IB, in addition to reassessing the risks and benefits for the participants.

Further, per the ResNo945 and the G-SUSARs, the sponsor must establish a monitoring plan to manage AEs that occur following a trial’s completion/termination. ResNo945 further explains that the plan should justify the proposed period, which takes into account the IP(s), the participants, and the clinical trial. Throughout the clinical development of the IP, the sponsor and the investigator must adopt immediate safety measures to protect the trial participants in the event of a SAE/SADR. The trial participant suffering from an AE must receive care and appropriate safety measures must be taken until their clinical condition is resolved or stabilized, as described in the clinical protocol. The G-SUSARs also notes that information about the late AEs can become part of the IP safety profile. See ResNo945 and the G-SUSARs for additional safety monitoring requirements.

Per BRA-73, Brazil has also implemented the ICH Guideline E2B (R3) on Electronic Transmission of Individual Case Safety Reports (ICSRs) - Data Elements and Message Specification - Implementation Guide (BRA-88).

See ResNo506 for detailed information on AE and SAE safety reporting requirements involving investigational advanced therapy products.

Ethics Committee Responsibilities

CLNo13 establishes specific CEP/National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) System processing requirements for SAEs occurring in Brazil and outside the country. As delineated in CLNo13, only SAEs should be reported to the CEP/CONEP System; it is optional for the investigator or sponsor to report an AE. SAE ethical analysis is the exclusive responsibility of CEPs, and CONEP prefers not to be involved in the review, except when at the CEP’s discretion, it is deemed necessary.

Per CLNo13, CEPs must present SAE notifications about a participant’s SAE index (initial SAE) and subsequent events in a single document, in tabular format, and submit it online to the CEP/CONEP System via Plataforma Brasil (BRA-34) using the “notification” function. This document must also be updated with each occurrence of a subsequent SAE. The document must contain the study identification research title and Certificate of Presentation of Ethical Appreciation (Certificado de Apresentação de Apreciação Ética) (CAAE)) number, name of the research center, name of the responsible investigator, coded identification of the participant and description of the index and subsequent events. Per BRA-91, the CAAE is the number generated by Plataforma Brasil (BRA-34) to identify the research project when it is received by CEP for ethical review.

CLNo13 explains that each SAE must be characterized according to the following:

Date of SAE occurrence
Participant number or code
SAE number or code
SAE classification (index or subsequent)
Breakdown of the occurrence (e.g., febrile neutropenia, pneumonia, etc.)
SAE type (death, life threatening, need for hospitalization, prolonged hospitalization, significant damage, permanent damage, congenital anomaly, at the investigator’s discretion, others)
Participant status on the date of the last update (in progress, recovered without sequelae, recovered with sequelae, and death)
Description of research participant withdrawal(s)
Additionally, in the case of multicenter studies, the investigator at the coordinating center must prepare the consolidated report (partial and final reports) containing information on SAEs from all of the participating research centers and submit it to the CEP to which it is linked via Plataforma Brasil (BRA-34) using the “notification” functionality. CLNo13 also explains that for SAEs occurring outside the country, it is the responsibility of the coordinating research center investigator to prepare the consolidated SAEs report. If the CEP is linked to the coordinating center, CONEP will also evaluate the SAEs if the protocol is included in item IX.4 of ResNo466.

Refer to CLNo008 for detailed instructions and the CONEP form to report SAEs to the CEP/CONEP System for review, and CLNo13 for information on processing AEs for Brazil and abroad.

Other Safety Reports

As described in ResNo945, the G-SUSARs, and the AESafetyManual, Drug Development Safety Reports (DSURs) must be sent annually to ANVISA, until the end of the clinical development of the IP in Brazil. The DSURs must be filed within a maximum of 60 calendar days of the yearly anniversary of the date that ANVISA approves the clinical trial application (DDCM), or the date determined in the international development. ResNo945 and the G-SUSARs also note that the DSURs must be prepared in accordance with the format described in the current version of the ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Development Safety Update Report (E2F) (BRA-72). The SAE/AE data collected by the sponsor that occur throughout clinical development must be submitted to the Independent Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (IDMC or Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)), if established, and the results of this assessment must be forwarded to ANVISA in the DSUR, in English, and at any time, upon request by ANVISA. See also the Site/Investigator Selection section for additional DSMB requirements.

Further, per the G-SUSARs, the sponsor must submit a single document containing data pertinent to all dosage forms and concentrations, all indications, and study participant populations associated with the IP. If this is not possible, a justification must be provided in the introductory section of the DSUR report. For concomitantly administered medicinal products, the sponsor may refer a single DSUR encompassing the IP and the other concomitantly administered therapies; or file separate reports for each IP product. For fixed-dose combinations, the sponsor must request a single DSUR covering all IPs. All safety-related modifications to the DDCM that are considered insubstantial must be also submitted to ANVISA as part of the DSUR.

For investigational advanced therapy products, SAEs must be reported through the Online Adverse Event Notification Form for Advanced Therapy Products (BRA-101).

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

As per BRA-83, VigiMed (BRA-83) is ANVISA’s online system for citizens, health professionals, drug registration holders, and study sponsors to report suspected SAEs related to drugs and vaccines. In accordance with ResNo945, BRA-37 indicates that upon registration with BRA-83, companies (sponsors) must submit SUSARs exclusively via BRA-83. In addition, ResNo945 states that SUSAR notifications should be submitted individually and contain all the information requested in the fields present in the electronic notification system and as provided in the ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (BRA-66) and its updates.

Per BRA-37, sponsors of clinical trials that have not yet been registered with VigiMed should complete VigiMed’s Registration/Change of Registration form (BRA-131) and send it to this email address: vigimed.pesquisa@anvisa.gov.br. See also BRA-130 for the VigiMed Company User Manual, and BRA-85 for VigiMed Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs).

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

As per ResNo945 and the G-CTReptsManual, the sponsor must file a progress report, known as an annual clinical trial protocol monitoring report, to the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) in the form of a secondary petition electronically attached to the respective protocol to which it is linked. The G-DDCMManual also specifies that the annual clinical trial monitoring report should be linked to the Specific Clinical Trial Dossier (Dossiê Específico de Ensaio Clínico (DEEC)).

ResNo945 states that the report should be filed within 60 calendar days of the start date of the clinical trial in Brazil. The annual report should contain the following information for each clinical trial protocol, in tabulated form, exclusively from Brazilian centers:

Clinical trial title and protocol code
Recruitment status and breakdown of the number of participants recruited by center in Brazil and worldwide
Number/description of deviations and protocol violations by center
Number of centers in Brazil and worldwide and their respective status, and
Number of serious adverse events (SAEs) per participant and per center in Brazil, including the description of SAEs related to the investigational drug or comparator, adverse drug reactions (ADRs), Suspected Serious and Unexpected Adverse Reactions (SUSARs), and whether or not the blinding was broken
Per ResNo945, the annual clinical trial monitoring reports should contain all information through the end of the clinical trial in Brazil. Afterwards, only the final clinical trial report needs to be submitted. Additionally, the annual report may be waived in the year in which the final report is filed.

As stated in LawNo14.874, the investigator is responsible for submitting partial reports with information on the progress of the research, annually and whenever requested, to the research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)) that analyzed the study.

Final Report

ResNo945 and the G-CTReptsManual state that the sponsor should submit a final report to ANVISA in the form of a secondary petition electronically attached to the respective protocol to which it is linked. The final report must be filed within 12 months of the clinical trial end date. ResNo945 also specifies that the report should be submitted after completing the activities of a clinical trial in all participating countries, for whatever reason. The final report should contain, at a minimum, the following:

Clinical trial title and protocol code
Final recruitment status and breakdown of the number of participants recruited by center in Brazil and worldwide
Final number of centers in Brazil and worldwide
Final number of SAEs per participant and per center in Brazil, including the description of SAEs related to the investigational drug or comparator, ADRs, SUSARs, and whether or not the blinding was broken
Reason for termination of the study and rationale for premature termination of development in Brazil or worldwide, when applicable
Per G-CTReptsManual, the annual and final reports for each clinical protocol may also be submitted using the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) format (BRA-27).

Other Reporting Requirements

As stated in ResNo945 and the G-CTReptsManual, in addition to submitting a final report, the sponsor is also responsible for submitting clinical trial start and end date forms for trials conducted in Brazil. The forms with the trial start and end dates must be filed as a secondary petition to the corresponding trial dossier within 30 calendar days after each start and end date. Per ResNo945, the secondary petition should be submitted to ANVISA corresponding to the Specific Clinical Trial Dossier (Dossiê Específico de Ensaio Clínico (DEEC)) process. See Submission Process section for secondary petition submission requirements. See BRA-56 to access ANVISA’s Solicita Electronic Petition Request System website that allows users to submit these forms electronically, and BRA-25 and BRA-24 for links to the notification forms. See also BRA-38 for additional information on accessing ANVISA’s electronic petitioning request systems.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
As per LawNo14.874 and ResNo945, a sponsor is defined as a natural or legal person, under public or private law, that supports research through financing, infrastructure, human resources, or institutional support. ResNo466 defines a sponsor as an individual, company, institution, or organization that supports research through the initiation, management, or financing of a clinical trial.

LawNo14.874 further explains that a sponsor may authorize a contract research organization (CRO) (clinical research representative organization (CRPO) in Brazil) to perform one (1) or more trial-related tasks and functions. ResNo945 specifies that a CRO is any company regularly installed in Brazil contracted by the sponsor or by the sponsor-investigator, which partially or totally assumes, together with the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)), the sponsor's responsibilities. Any trial-related functions that are transferred to a CRO must also be specified in writing in a document signed by the sponsor and CRO. Per LawNo14.874 and ResNo945, although the sponsor may transfer their trial-related functions, the sponsor still has definitive responsibility for the quality and integrity of the clinical trial data.

ResNo945 also defines a sponsor-investigator as the natural person responsible for conducting and coordinating clinical trials, alone or in a group. The sponsor-investigator uses their own financial and material resources from national or international research funding entities or by private entities and other non-profit entities, while maintaining immediate and independent control over the study. When a clinical trial is developed by a sponsor-investigator, the institution with which the individual is linked is the primary sponsor. The primary sponsor may delegate responsibilities to the investigator, who will be responsible for conducting the clinical trial at the institution, and the sponsor-investigator will serve as the secondary sponsor. In the case of delegating responsibilities and activities, a written document must be signed between the parties.

In addition, per ResNo903, when a sponsor or CRO transfers responsibility to another company for submitting a clinical trial application (Clinical Drug Development Dossier (Dossiê de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Medicamento (DDCM))) and for submitting the linked specific clinical trial processes for an investigational product (IP) to ANVISA, the succeeding company must update the related clinical trial registration data via a petition for global transfer of responsibility for the clinical trial. See ResNo903 for additional information. See BRA-96 for more information on the global transfer of responsibility clinical trial request process. See also the Submission Content section for specific documentation requirements, and the Submission Process, Insurance & Compensation, and Manufacturing & Import sections for additional requirements related to global transfer of responsibility for the clinical trial.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
Overview

As set forth LawNo14.874 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for a clinical trial. The sponsor must also ensure that the investigator(s) are qualified by education, training, and experience to assume responsibility for the proper conduct of the trial. BRA-28 also notes that the investigator(s) should provide evidence of all the qualifications specified by the applicable regulatory requirements through up-to-date curriculum vitae(s) (CVs) and/or other relevant documentation requested by the sponsor, the research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)), and/or the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)).

As delineated in BRA-28, prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s) and the institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and an investigator’s brochure. Additionally, the sponsor must define and allocate all study related duties and responsibilities to the relevant parties participating in the study. See the Submission Content section for additional information on clinical trial application requirements. See also CLNo046 for the National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) guidance on submitting requests for inclusion/exclusion of research center(s).

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

As specified in the ResNo945, the sponsor may transfer any or all of the sponsor’s study related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO) (clinical research representative organization (CRPO) in Brazil). However, the sponsor is ultimately responsible for the study data’s quality and integrity. Any study related duties, functions, or responsibilities transferred to and assumed by a local representative or CRO must be specified in writing. However, as per ResNo945, a CRO can only submit a clinical trial application on the sponsor’s behalf when the sponsor has no headquarters or branch in Brazil.

Data Safety and Monitoring Board

LawNo14.874 states that, whenever possible, an independent data monitoring committee (Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)) should be established to periodically evaluate the progress of the research, safety data, and critical points of efficacy and recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or interrupt a research study. In addition, ResNo945 indicates that it is desirable that an Independent Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (IDMC) (DSMB) be established by the sponsor to evaluate, at defined intervals or as needed in an emergency, the progress of the clinical trial, the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints, and recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, interrupt, or suspend a trial. The G-SUSARs also suggests that a DSMB be established, regardless of the clinical phase. The decision on the need to set up a DSMB must consider several factors including:

Clinical and scientific relevance to the clinical trial
Potential acceptable benefits and risks for the protection of participants
Type of population
Trial design, including objective(s) and outcome(s)
Relevance of the committee to the integrity of the research
See also G-DSMB-BRA for DSMB operational guidelines.

Multicenter Studies

BRA-28 indicates that for multicenter trials, the sponsor should ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and, if required, by ANVISA, and given approval/favorable opinion by the EC (CEP)
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites. For investigators collecting additional data, supplemental CRFs should also be provided that are designed to capture the additional data
The responsibilities of coordinating investigator(s) and the other participating investigators are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards for the assessment of clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication between investigators is facilitated
Per BRA-28, the sponsor must also organize a coordinating committee or select coordinating investigators.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 24, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.  

Insurance

As set forth in the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, the sponsor is responsible for providing insurance or should indemnify the investigator/institution against claims arising from the trial, except for claims that arise from malpractice and/or negligence.

Compensation

Injury or Death

As specified in the LawNo14.874 and ResNo945, the sponsor is responsible for providing compensation and health assistance to research participants who have suffered as a result of their participation in the research. ResNo945 further specifies that the sponsor is responsible for all expenses related to procedures and examinations, especially those related to diagnosis, treatment, monitoring, and hospitalization of the clinical trial participant, and should take other actions necessary to resolve adverse events related to the clinical trial.

Additionally, per ResNo466, the investigator, the sponsor, and the institutions and/or organizations involved in the different phases of the research must provide immediate assistance, as well as be responsible for providing full assistance to research participants with regard to complications and damages arising from the research. Research participants should also be ensured that the conditions for monitoring, treatment, comprehensive assistance and guidance, including in-screening research, will be in place as long as necessary. LawNo14.874 also notes that the institutions and organizations involved in the research will be jointly responsible for its conduct and will provide full assistance to the participants with regard to complications and damages arising from the research.

Trial Participation

LawNo14.874 delineates that remuneration of the participant, or the granting of any type of advantage for their participation in research, is prohibited. However, the following do not constitute remuneration or advantage for the research participant:

Reimbursement of transportation, food expenses, or prior material provision
Other types of compensation required, depending on the research project
Also, as specified in ResNo466, compensation to participants is only provided for transportation costs and meals for the participants or legal representative/guardian during the trial.

See BRA-29 for additional information on participant compensation rights.

Post-Trial Access

Pursuant to LawNo14.874, before the start of the clinical trial, the sponsor and the investigator must submit a post-study access plan to the research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)), presenting and justifying the need or otherwise to provide free access to the investigational product (IP) after the trial’s completion. If there is a need to supply post-trial access to the IP, a post-study supply program must be prepared, in accordance with the regulations. In order to guarantee the receipt of the IP after the end of the clinical trial, the post-study supply program must ensure the continuity of the participant's safety monitoring. The program should only be initiated after regulatory approval, the request for which must be submitted in a timely manner so that the research participant can transition to the post-study period without prejudice to the continuity of treatment.

Additionally, per LawNo14.874, at the end of the clinical trial, the investigator, after hearing from the sponsor and the research participant, must carry out an assessment on an individual basis to determine the need to continue the IP for each participant. The free provision of the IP after the trial must be implemented whenever it is considered the best therapy or treatment for the participant’s clinical condition and presents a more favorable risk-benefit ratio in comparison with other available treatments. The assessment of the need for continued supply of the IP after the clinical trial must be carried out in accordance with the following criteria:

The severity of the disease and its threat to the participant's continued life
The availability of satisfactory therapeutic alternatives for the participant’s treatment, considering their location
If the experimental drug addresses an unmet clinical need
If the evidence of benefit to the participant outweighs the evidence of risk with the use of the experimental drug
Per LawNo14.874, the free supply of the IP within the scope of the post-study supply program may be interrupted, upon submission of justification to the EC (CEP), for assessment, only in any of the following situations:

The research participant chooses to stop participating, or the participant cannot freely and validly express their consent
A cure has been identified for the disease or health problem targeted by the clinical trial, or a satisfactory therapeutic alternative has been introduced, a fact duly documented by the investigator
The lack of benefit from the participant’s continued use of the IP, considering the risk-benefit relationship outside the trial context or the emergence of new evidence of risks related to the IP’s safety profile, a fact duly documented by the investigator
The occurrence of an adverse reaction that, at the investigator’s discretion, makes it impossible to continue using the IP, even in the face of potential benefits
The impossibility of obtaining or manufacturing the IP for technical or safety reasons, duly justified, and provided that the sponsor provides an equivalent or superior therapeutic alternative available on the market
A lapse of five (5) years, counted from the commercial availability of the experimental drug in the country
The availability of the IP in the public health network
LawNo14.874 further notes that in the case of reactions arising from the study itself, the sponsor must ensure appropriate and necessary health care or measures for the research participant.

In addition, per ResNo466, at the end of the study, the sponsor much ensure free and indefinite access to the best prophylactic, diagnostic, and therapeutic methods that have proven to be effective. Access must also be guaranteed to participants between the time they stop their participation in the trial and the end of the study.

Further, ResNo563 states that for protocols involving research participants diagnosed with ultra-rare diseases, the sponsor must ensure free access to the best prophylactic, diagnostic, and therapeutic methods that have proven to be effective at the end of the study, for a period of five (5) years after obtaining ANVISA registration. ResNo311, which amends ResNo38, also indicates that the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) (clinical research representative organization (CRPO) in Brazil) should guarantee access to the post-study drug supply program for research participants enrolled in a clinical study in accordance with the Resolutions of the National Health Council (Conselho Nacional de Saúde (CNS)). The free supply of medicines should also be made available to participants when the study is terminated early. The sponsor is required to complete the Sponsor’s Responsibility and Commitment Statement Form for Expanded Access, Compassionate Use, or Post-Study Medicine Supply Programs (see BRA-126 for form).

In addition, per ResNo903, the global transfer of sponsor or CRO responsibility for clinical trials is also applicable to expanded access programs, compassionate use programs, and post-study drug supply. See ResNo903 for additional information. See also the Submission Content section for specific documentation requirements, and the Submission Process, Insurance & Compensation, and Manufacturing & Import sections for additional requirements related to global transfer of responsibility for the clinical trial.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As set forth in LawNo14.874 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil adopted per ResNo945, the sponsor is responsible for the implementation and maintenance of quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems, based on standard operating procedures (SOPs), in order to ensure that research is conducted and data is generated, documented, and reported in compliance with the protocol, good clinical practices (GCP), and other applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor is responsible for QC during each stage of data processing, with a view to ensuring its reliability and correct processing; and for maintaining the quality and integrity of research data, even if some or all functions have been transferred to a contract research organization (CRO) (clinical research representative organization (CRPO) in Brazil). Per BRA-28, the CRO should also implement a QA/QC plan.

As delineated in BRA-28, the sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, focusing on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that includes:

During protocol development, identifying risks to critical trial processes and data
Identifying risks to critical trial processes and data
Evaluating the identified risks against existing risk controls
Deciding which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept
Documenting quality management activities and communicating to those involved in or affected by these activities
Periodically reviewing risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant
Describing in the clinical study report, the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarizing important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken
In addition, BRA-28 states that the sponsor is responsible for obtaining agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. See the Initiation, Agreements & Registration section for additional information on sponsor agreements with investigator(s), institution(s), and any other parties.

ResNo945 also notes that in the case of a clinical trial initiated by the investigator, the institution to which the investigator is linked will be the primary sponsor. While the primary sponsor cannot delegate the quality assurance, auditing, and monitoring activities of clinical trials to the sponsor-investigator, the primary sponsor may delegate these responsibilities to a CRO. The primary sponsor must present its own or outsourced structure with quality assurance and monitoring.

Monitoring Requirements

As part of its QA system, BRA-28 notes that the sponsor or the CRO should ensure the trial is adequately monitored and determine the appropriate extent and nature of monitoring, based on considerations such as the objective, purpose, design, complexity, blinding, size, and endpoints of the trial. Monitors, which are appointed by the sponsor, should be appropriately trained, and have the scientific and/or clinical knowledge needed to monitor the trial adequately. A monitor’s qualifications should be documented.

BRA-28 also explains that if or when the sponsor performs audits as part of implementing QA, the following should be considered:

The purpose of the audit should be to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, GCP, and other applicable regulatory requirements
The sponsor should appoint auditors to review the clinical trial who are independent of the clinical trial/data collection system(s)
The sponsor should ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience, and the auditor’s qualifications should be documented
Auditing procedures that ensure the auditing of clinical trials/systems is conducted in accordance with the sponsor’s written SOPs
The auditor’s observations and findings should be documented
LawNo14.874 also notes that the investigator is responsible for providing, when requested, direct access to research records and documents for the monitor, the auditor, other representatives of the sponsor, the research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)), the National Research Ethics Authority, and the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)); allowing the sponsor to monitor and audit the research; and allowing ANVISA, the National Research Ethics Authority, and the EC (CEP) to conduct inspections.

BRA-28 does not provide a specific timeframe for the audit process. Regulatory authorities may seek access to an audit report on a case-by-case basis when evidence of serious GCP noncompliance exists, or in the course of legal proceedings. Additionally, noncompliance with the protocol, SOPs, GCP, and/or applicable regulatory requirement(s) by an investigator/institution or member(s) of the sponsor’s staff should lead to prompt action by the sponsor to secure compliance. If the monitoring and/or auditing identify serious and/or persistent noncompliance on the part of an investigator/institution, the sponsor should terminate the investigator’s/ institution’s participation in the trial. When an investigator’s/institution’s participation is terminated because of noncompliance, the sponsor should notify the regulatory authorities promptly. Refer to BRA-28 for detailed audit requirements.

Additionally, in the event of a routine inspection by ANVISA, RegNo122 states that the agency will notify the institution at least 15 calendar days in advance of the visit. Both the sponsor and/or the CRO are responsible for preparing for the inspection. ANVISA must also notify the principal investigator (PI) of the scheduled visit to the center to be inspected, when applicable, by means of a GCP Inspection Notification Letter. For more detailed information on ANVISA’s inspection process, refer to RegNo122. See also Scope of Assessment section for detailed ANVISA inspection requirements.

ANVISA has also published GuideNo35-2020 and GuideNo36-2020 to provide guidance on the procedures for conducting GCP inspections in clinical trial centers, and provide guidance for sponsors and CROs respectively for clinical trials involving medicines and biological products. Both guides describe ANVISA’s compliance with the GCP inspection requirements set forth in RegNo122 with the goal of guiding those involved in the inspection procedures to ensure a unified standard and the safety of all involved parties.

See ResNo926 for information on ANVISA’s inspection requirements for research centers to obtain a Certification of Good Practices to conduct bioavailability/bioequivalence drug studies.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

Pursuant to LawNo14.874, the sponsor is responsible for promptly communicating to the investigators involved, the executing institution, and ANVISA regarding the reasons for the suspension or premature termination of the research, where applicable. ResNo945 further explains that, at any time, the sponsor may suspend or cancel a (Clinical Drug Development Dossier (Dossiê de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Medicamento (DDCM))) or approved clinical trial, provided that the appropriate justifications are submitted, as well as a plan for monitoring the participants, if the clinical trial has been initiated. Per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMAmdmts, once a DDCM has been cancelled, no clinical trials related to it may be continued in the country. If a DDCM or clinical trial is canceled for safety reasons, the sponsor must describe the reasons for the cancellation and present the measures to minimize/mitigate risk to the clinical trial participants in compliance with the requirements detailed in the AESafetyManual. Per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, suspensions and cancellations must be filed with ANVISA, in the form of a secondary petition attached to the corresponding DDCM. ResNo945 and the G-DDCMAmdmts also note that the petition must be submitted within 15 business days following the decision to suspend or cancel a DDCM or clinical trial.

In addition, ResNo945 and the G-DDCMAmdmts state that in cases where the sponsor temporarily suspends the DDCM or clinical trial, as an immediate safety measure, the sponsor must notify ANVISA within seven (7) calendar days from the date of suspension. ResNo945 also notes that the reasons, scope, interruption of treatment, and suspension of participant recruitment must be clearly explained in the temporary suspension notification. The request for reactivation of a suspended clinical trial protocol or DDCM must be accompanied by the appropriate justifications, and the sponsor must await authorization from ANVISA to restart the clinical trial. As per the G-DDCMAmdmts, the temporary suspension can be reactivated with the submission of a secondary petition to ANVISA. Refer to the Submission Content section for instructions on submitting a secondary petition to suspend or cancel a DDCM or clinical trial.

Per ResNo945, the sponsor may, at any time, request that ANVISA discontinue its analysis of the DDCM, Specific Clinical Trial Dossier (Dossiê Específico de Ensaio Clínico (DEEC)) and secondary petitions. The withdrawal request must be accompanied by the appropriate justifications and applies only to petitions in which ANVISA’s decision has not yet been published in the Official Gazette of the Union (Diário Oficial da União (DOU)). Temporary suspension, cancellation, reactivation, and withdrawal of DDCM, DEEC, and secondary petitions may only be implemented after ANVISA has issued a statement, which must be issued within 30 business days, by means of publication of its decision in the DOU. However, in the case of temporary DDCM or clinical trial suspension as a safety measure, ANVISA’s implementation must be immediate, and the analysis carried out within 10 calendar days.

BRA-28 also explains that if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor should promptly inform the investigators/institutions, and the regulatory authority(ies) of the termination or suspension and the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. The EC (CEP) should be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor or by the investigator/institution, as specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s). Additionally, if the investigator terminates or suspends a trial without the sponsor’s prior agreement, the investigator should inform the institution where applicable, and the investigator/institution should promptly inform the sponsor and the EC, and should provide the sponsor and the EC a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

As set forth in the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor must ensure that the system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. To validate such systems, the sponsor should use a risk assessment approach that takes into consideration the system’s intended use and potential to affect human participant protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, the sponsor must maintain standard operation procedures (SOPs) that cover system setup, installation, and use. The SOPs should describe system validation and functionality testing, data collection and handling, system maintenance, system security measures, change control, data backup, recovery, contingency planning, and decommissioning. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the system users should be provided with training. Refer to BRA-28 for additional information.

Records Management

As delineated in ResNo945, the sponsor must be responsible for storing clinical trial data for a period of five (5) years after the last approval of a registration request for registration in Brazil. ResNo945 and BRA-28 also state that the sponsor should retain clinical trial data in physical or digital format for at least two (2) years in case of the following instances: the investigational product’s clinical development is discontinued, completion of the registration application is not achieved, or a marketing application receives the last approval. Per BRA-28, the sponsor should also inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed.

Additionally, per LawNo14.874, investigators are responsible for storing under their custody, in physical or digital media, essential research data and documents for a period of five (5) years after a project’s formal end or discontinuation, and for a period of 10 years in the case of advanced therapy products.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.  

Responsible Parties

For the purposes of data protection requirements, the LGPD delineates that the sponsor acts as the “controller” who is responsible for decisions regarding the processing of personal or sensitive personal research data. Within this context, the controller (sponsor) may carry out studies as a research body, guaranteeing, whenever possible, the anonymization of personal data.

Per CD-ANPD-No18, which regulates the performance of the person responsible for processing data, the person in charge is appointed by the controller and operator to act as a communication channel between the controller, data subjects, and the National Data Protection Authority (Autoridade Nacional de Proteção de Dados (ANPD)). The person in charge may be a natural person, member of the organizational structure of the processing agent or external to it, or a legal entity, and must be able to communicate with the holders and with the ANPD, clearly, precisely, and in Portuguese. Additionally, the exercise of activity of the person in charge does not presuppose registration with any entity or any specific certification or professional training. See CD-ANPD-No18 for details on the activities and duties of the person in charge and how conflicts of interest are handled. Refer to G-CD-ANPD-No18 for additional guidance and good practices for data processing agents. See also BRA-116 and BRA-119 for additional information.

Data Protection

As set forth in C-AmndtNo115, the protection of personal data is a guaranteed fundamental right in Brazil. The LGPD further delineates data protection principles (e.g., purpose, adequacy, necessity, free access, data quality, transparency, security, prevention, non-discrimination, and accountability) with which the controller must comply. The protection and anonymity of the personal data of research participants is also regulated by LawNo14.874, and applied subsidiarily to the LGPD.

Per the LGPD, the data quality principle is fulfilled when the controller can guarantee to the data subjects that their personal data is processed with accuracy, clarity, and relevance, and is updated as required to meet the compliance requirements for the stated purpose. The controller must keep a record of the personal data processing operations carried out, especially when the processing operation is for an official purpose. The controller must also provide instructions to the operator, the person responsible for processing the personal data on the controller’s behalf, to check compliance with the specified instructions and rules. Additionally, the controller is required to protect the confidentiality of the personal data holder and their background. The holder is defined as the person whose personal data are being processed.

The LGPD also provides a definition for sensitive personal data or information that encompasses health related considerations. Sensitive personal data refers to personal data about racial or ethnic origin; religious belief; political opinion; union membership or organization of a religious, philosophical, or political nature; data relating to health or sexual life; and genetic or biometric data, when linked to a natural person.

Pursuant to the LGPD, the controller may implement a privacy governance program that, at a minimum:

Demonstrates the controller’s commitment to adopt internal processes and policies that ensure comprehensive compliance with the rules and good practices regarding the protection of personal data
Is applicable to the entire set of personal data that are under its control, regardless of the way it was collected
Be adapted to the structure, scale, and volume of its operations, as well as to the sensitivity of the processed data
Establish adequate policies and safeguards based on a systematic assessment of impacts and risks to privacy
Has the objective of establishing a relationship of trust with the holder through transparent action and that ensures participation mechanisms exist for the holder
Is integrated into its general governance structure and establishes and applies internal and external supervisory mechanisms
Counts on incident response and remediation plans
Is constantly updated based on information obtained from continuous monitoring and periodic evaluations
See the LGPD and BRA-76 for detailed information on data protection requirements in Brazil.

As per OrdNo1.184, the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) has established a personal data protection policy to comply with the provisions in Article 23 of the LGPD, which define personal data processing requirements for legal entities governed by public law. OrdNo1.184 specifically delineates internal guidelines for ANVISA for the protection of personal data, and for compliance with legislation, standards, guidelines, and other acts related to privacy, personal data protection, transparency, access to public information, and the protection of freedoms and fundamental rights of individuals. The guidelines are applicable to employees, collaborators, outsourced workers, interns, suppliers, service providers, and everyone who carries out activities that involve, directly or indirectly, the processing of personal data held by ANVISA. See OrdNo1.184 for details, and BRA-77 for additional background information.

Additionally, per ResNo738, which aims to standardize the use of databases for the purpose of scientific research involving human beings, database information is protected to preserve the dignity and fundamental rights of research participants, especially as it relates to their informational self-determination, freedom, privacy, honor, and image. Researchers, sponsors, and institutions involved in the creation and use of databases must act with integrity and responsibility when processing data, and are responsible for:

Respecting the rights of participants
Guaranteeing the confidentiality of information
Preserving the freedom, privacy, intimacy, honor, and image of participants, especially when there is identifying or sensitive data
Applying information security measures
Keeping the database in a safe place, where access is restricted, controlled, and traceable
Adopting measures to reduce the risk of damage, tampering, or loss of data
Respecting the principles of research integrity
ResNo738 further explains that research protocols, which involve the creation of a database or the use of existing databases, must be processed in accordance with the type of research and the modulation factors established in ResNo674. The research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP))/National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)), jointly known as the CEP/CONEP System, is responsible for this review process. (See Scope of Review section for detailed information on research classification and protocol review pathways.) Personal data processing may be carried out to execute studies by a research body that guarantees, whenever possible the anonymization and security of personal data. Unless the participant or legal representative/guardian provides a signed consent that is approved by the CEP/CONEP system, personal identifying data must also be removed when the data is deposited, partially or completely, in national or international banks, with public or restricted access. Refer to ResNo738 for additional details on the management and use of database information for research purposes.

In the event of a security incident, per CD-ANPD-No15, the controller must communicate to the ANPD and the data holder the occurrence of a security incident that could cause significant risk or damage to the holders in compliance with Article 48 of the LGPD. CD-ANPD-No15, which defines a security incident as any confirmed adverse event, related to the violation of the confidentiality, integrity, availability, and authenticity properties of personal data security, and involves at least one (1) of the following criteria:

Sensitive personal data
Data on children, adolescents, or elderly people
Financial data
Authentication data in systems
Data protected by legal, judicial, or professional secrecy
Large-scale data
Per CD-ANPD-No15, the controller must communicate the incident to the ANPD and to the personal data holder within three (3) working days from the date of first awareness. The controller must also keep a record of the security incident for a minimum of five (5) years, counting from the date of registration, unless additional obligations are established that require a longer period of record maintenance. See CD-ANPD-No15 for detailed reporting requirements. See also BRA-61 and BRA-62 for additional background information.

In addition, per CD-ANPD-No19, establishes the procedures and rules applicable to international data transfer operations for countries or international organizations that provide a level of personal data protection adequate to that provided for in the LGPD, upon recognition of adequacy by the ANPD; or, when the controller verifies compliance with the principles, rights of the holder, and the data protection regime in the form of specific contractual clauses for a given transfer; standard contractual clauses; or global corporate standards as provided for in the LGPD and CD-ANPD-No19. Refer to Chapter V of the LGPD, CD-ANPD-No19, and BRA-118 for detailed international data transfer requirements.

CD-ANPD-No19 further explains that if the international data transfer involves sensitive personal data, the parties will apply additional safeguards, including specific security measures proportionate to the risks of the processing activity, the specific nature of the data and the interests, rights, and guarantees to be protected. Also, if the international data transfer involves the sensitive personal data of children and adolescents, the parties will apply additional safeguards, including measures to ensure that the processing is carried out in their best interests, in accordance with national legislation and international law. The parties must adopt security measures and provide information on measures taken which consider the nature of the information processed, the specific characteristics and purpose of the processing, the current state of technology, and the risks to the rights of the holders, especially in the case of sensitive personal data and of children and adolescents. The measures may include, among others, the governance and supervision of internal processes, and technical and administrative security measures, including measures to ensure the security of the operations carried out, such as the collection, transmission, and storage of data.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

Per LGPD, the processing of personal data can only be carried out in the following cases:

By providing consent by the holder
For the fulfillment of a legal or regulatory obligation by the controller
By the public administration, for the treatment and shared use of data necessary for the implementation of public policies provided for in laws and regulations or supported by contracts, agreements, or similar instruments per Chapter IV (LGPD)
To carry out studies by a research body, guaranteeing, whenever possible, the anonymization of personal data
When necessary for the execution of a contract or preliminary procedures related to a contract to which the holder is a party, at the request of the data subject
For the regular exercise of rights in judicial, administrative, or arbitration proceedings
The LGPD further specifies that the processing of sensitive personal data may only be carried out when the holder or the holder’s legal guardian consents, in a specific and obvious way, for the purpose of processing sensitive personal data. The consent must be provided in writing or by another means that demonstrates the holder’s intention. If the consent is provided in writing, it must be included in a separate clause of the other contractual clauses. The sponsor bears the burden of proving that the consent was obtained in accordance with the provisions of this law. The processing of personal data is prohibited by the absence of consent. The consent must refer to specific purposes; generic authorizations for the processing of personal data will be voided. The consent can be revoked at any time by express statement of the holder, by a free and facilitated procedure. If the information is changed, the sponsor must inform the holder and specifically highlight the content of the amendments. In cases where the holder’s consent is required, the holder can revoke consent if opposed to the changes.

Further, per the LGPD, the processing of sensitive personal data may occur without the holder’s consent in those cases where it is indispensable for:

Compliance with legal or regulatory obligations by the controller
Shared processing of data necessary for the execution, by the public administration, of public policies provided for in laws or regulations
Carrying out studies by a research body, guaranteeing, whenever possible, the anonymization of sensitive personal data
Regular exercise of rights, including in contract and in judicial, administrative, and arbitration proceedings
Protection of the life or physical safety of the holder or third party
Guardianship of health, exclusively, in a procedure performed by health professionals, health services, or health authority
Guarantee of fraud prevention and security of the holder, in the processes of identification and registration authentication in electronic systems, safeguarding the rights mentioned in Article 9 of this law, and, except in the event that the fundamental rights and freedoms of the holder prevail that require the protection of personal data
Data holders also have the right to be informed about the collection and use of their personal data. The data holder is entitled to obtain from the sponsor access to their treated data at any time and upon request. Treatment is defined as any operation performed with personal data. See Chapter III of the LGPD for additional information on the rights of data holders.

See CLNo1-2021 for CONEP guidelines for investigators and CEPs related to contact with research participants (e.g., obtaining informed consent and ensuring confidentiality) and/or data collection at any phase of a research study in a virtual environment. See also CLNo039 for CONEP guidance on accessing and using a participant’s medical records for research purposes while ensuring compliance with privacy and confidentiality standards. The guideline also states that all participants should be treated with dignity, respect for their autonomy, and ensure protection for vulnerable populations. See also BRA-29 for additional resources on participant rights to data privacy. Refer to the G-PDP-Acad for recommendations and good practices to support the processing of personal data for academic purposes and for performing studies and research in compliance with the LGPD.

In addition, as indicated in ResNo738, participants in research databases are the owners of their data and must be guaranteed fundamental rights to access their stored information at any time. Participants may request corrections or updates to their database information that they believe to have been entered incorrectly. They may request the partial or total removal of their information, with the cancellation valid from the date they first communicated their concern. Participants also have the right to request compensation if there is damage resulting from the misuse or breach of security or confidentiality of their stored data.

ResNo738 further explains in research that proposes the creation of a database, the informed consent form (ICF) (also known as the Free and Informed Consent Form (Termo de Consentimento Livre e Esclarecido (TCLE)) in Brazil) must contain the following:

Research justification and objectives, risks and benefits of data storage including information about the future use of data, when applicable
Description of the procedures adopted to guarantee the secrecy and confidentiality of information, ensuring the preservation of the intimacy, honor, and image of the participants
Description of strategies for controlling access to data and information
Information about the future use of data and information for research, in a specific and highlighted way, when there is this intention, presenting alternatives that indicate the need or not for new consent
Justification for sharing bank data and information, in a specific and prominent way, when there is this intention, presenting alternatives that indicate the participant's authorization or not
Information on the irreversible anonymization of data, when any, with explanations of the consequences of such a procedure
Information about the right to request correction, partial withdrawal, or complete removal of the participant’s data and information
Consent for Processing Personal Data of Children/Adolescents

Per the LGPD, the processing of personal data of children and adolescents must be carried out in their best interest with specific and highlighted consent given by at least one (1) of the parents or the legal guardian. However, the sponsors are permitted to collect personal data from children without the consent of a parent or legal guardian when collection is necessary to contact the parent or legal guardian, used only once and without storage, or for their protection, and in no case may be passed on to a third party without the consent of at least one (1) parent or the legal guardian.

The sponsor must make all reasonable efforts to verify that the consent was given by the individual responsible for the child, considering the available technologies. Additionally, information on the processing of the personal data of children and adolescents must be provided in a simple, clear, and accessible manner, considering the physical-motor, perceptual, sensory, intellectual, and mental characteristics of the user, using audiovisual resources when appropriate, in order to provide the necessary information to the parents or legal guardian, and that is appropriate to the child’s level of understanding.

To facilitate the processing of personal data of children and adolescents, the ANPD-No1 states that processing may be based on the legal hypotheses delineated in Article 7 (personal data) or in Article 11 (sensitive personal data) of the LGPD, provided that the best interest of the children and adolescents prevails, as evaluated in the specific case.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Brazilian clinical trials, a freely given informed consent is required to be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in LawNo14.874 and ResNo466. Per LawNo14.874 and OMREC, the informed consent form (ICF) is known as the Free and Informed Consent Form (Termo de Consentimento Livre e Esclarecido (TCLE)) in Brazil.

As per LawNo14.874, the ResNo466, and OMREC, the ICF is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by a research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)). CLNo51 further clarifies that the ICF should be written as an invitation rather than as a statement as this may reduce the participant’s autonomy. Refer to CLNo51 for detailed information. See the Required Elements section for details on contents to be included in the form.

LawNo14.874, OMREC, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, state that the investigator, or their designated representative, must fully inform the participant or the legal representative/guardian of the relevant aspects of the research, including the EC’s (CEP)’s approval. As delineated in LawNo14.874, ResNo466, OMREC, the G-ClinProtocols-FAQs, and BRA-28, the ICF content should be presented in clear and objective language that is easy to understand to ensure the participant or the legal representative(s)/guardian(s) completely understands the research. Per BRA-28, neither the investigator nor the research staff should coerce or improperly influence a potential participant to enroll in the clinical trial. Further, per LawNo14.874 and BRA-28, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive their legal rights, or, per BRA-28, that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representatives from their liabilities for any negligence. Per LawNo14.874, the research participant or their legal representative/guardian may withdraw their consent at any time, regardless of justification, without any burden or loss being incurred. ResNo466 further notes that the investigator must bear in mind that the prospective participant’s ability to understand the information required to give consent depends on their maturity, ethics, intelligence, education, and cultural beliefs. Per LawNo14.874, the G-ClinProtocols-FAQs, and BRA-28, the information should be in both written and oral form. Also, per the G-ClinProtocols-FAQs and BRA-28, the participant and the legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate. See BRA-29 for additional information on informed consent.

Re-Consent

According to LawNo14.874 and BRA-28, the ICF must be updated and submitted for EC (CEP) consideration whenever new relevant information arises that could alter the research participant’s decision regarding their participation. CLNo17 also notes that the EC (CEP) should approve any change in the ICF due to a protocol modification or an alteration in treatment modality, procedures, or site visits before such changes are implemented. Per BRA-28 and CLNo51, the investigator must ensure that the participant or legal representative/guardian sign the revised ICF and any other updated information. CLNo17 further notes that changes made to the ICF through separate documents are not considered acceptable. The update requires the investigator to generate a single and complete version of the new document, free of addenda and/or other documents associated with it. The investigator or their delegated representative should also emphasize the changes contained in the updated ICF. The clarifications delineated in CLNo17 also apply to assent forms.

Language Requirements

As earlier stated, LawNo14.874, ResNo466, the G-ClinProtocols-FAQs, and BRA-28 require the ICF to be presented orally and in writing at a level that the participant is able to understand. The G-ClinProtocols-FAQs further notes that the ICF must be adequately adapted and be fully revised in Portuguese to ensure that the document is properly translated.

Documenting Consent

LawNo14.874, BRA-28, and OMREC state that the participant or legal representative/guardian, and the investigator(s) must sign and date the ICF. In addition, LawNo14.874 and BRA-28 explain that if the participant or legal representative/guardian is illiterate, an impartial witness should be present throughout the informed consent process. At this time, the participant or legal representative/guardian will give verbal, and, if possible, written consent, and the witness should sign and date the form, certifying that the written information was explained accurately and understood.

Before participating in the study, per OMREC, the participant should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF, and any other written information provided during the informed consent process. ResNo466 and the G-ClinProtocols-FAQs specify that two (2) original copies of the ICF should be prepared with all pages initialed and signed by the participant or legal representative/guardian, and the investigator(s) or person(s) overseeing the consent process.

Waiver of Consent

No information is available on consent waivers for research participants. See the Consent for Specimen section for information on waivers pertaining to a participant’s stored genetic materials.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
Based on ResNo466, OMREC, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study purpose and duration of the trial
The trial procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The participant’s responsibilities
Experimental aspects of the study
The approximate number of participants in the study
Any expected risks or discomforts to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
Any expected benefits to the participant; if no benefit is expected, the participant should be informed of this point
Treatments available to participants, how they are administered, and the probability of receiving every treatment
Compensation and/or treatment available for the participant in the case of trial-related injury
The disclosure of specific appropriate alternative procedures or therapies available to the participant, and their potential benefits and risks
The probability for random assignment to each treatment
Any expenses the participant needs to pay to participate in the trial
Anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
Confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained, and permission is given to monitors, auditors, the ethics committee(s), and the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) to access the participant’s medical records to verify the procedures or trial data without violating the participant’s confidentiality, insofar as the applicable laws and regulations permit
That participation is voluntary, and that the participant can withdraw from the study at any time without penalty or loss of benefits, including medical treatment, to which the participant is otherwise entitled
Contact information for the sponsor and investigator in the event of participant problems or trial-related injuries
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without consent
The consequences of a participant’s decision to withdraw from the research, and procedures for orderly withdrawal by the participant
That the participant or legal representative/guardian will be notified in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the course of the study which may affect the participant’s willingness to continue
See the Vulnerable Populations and Consent for Specimen sections for further information.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
Overview

In accordance with LawNo14.874 and ResNo466, Brazil’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights and dignity of research participants. A participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process. (See the Required Elements; Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.)

See CLNo1-2021 for National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) guidelines for investigators and research ethics committees (ECs) (Comitês de Ética em Pesquisa (CEPs)) related to contact with research participants (e.g., obtaining informed consent and ensuring confidentiality) and/or data collection at any phase of a research study in a virtual environment. See also CLNo039 for CONEP guidance on accessing and using a participant’s medical records for research purposes while ensuring compliance with privacy and confidentiality standards. The guideline also states that all participants should be treated with dignity, respect for their autonomy, and ensure protection for vulnerable populations. See also BRA-29 for additional information on participant rights during the informed consent process.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the LawNo14.874, ResNo466, OMREC, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, the participant or legal representative/guardian, should be informed that participation is voluntary, that they may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As delineated in the ResNo466, OMREC, and BRA-28, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per the ResNo466, OMREC, and BRA-28, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. LawNo14.874 also states that the research must respect the participant’s privacy and the rules of confidentiality of their data, thereby ensuring the preservation of the confidentiality of their identity.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

BRA-28 and OMREC explain that the research participant or legal representative/guardian, should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries and/or to appeal against a violation of their rights.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

LawNo14.874 and ResNo466 clearly state that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of the participant’s health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
As delineated in LawNo14.874, the inclusion of a participant in research in an emergency situation and without their prior consent will follow the provisions of the approved protocol. The research participant or the legal representative/guardian must be notified at the first possible opportunity and the decision regarding their continued participation in the research must be collected.

In addition, according to the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, in emergency situations, when prior consent of the participant is not possible, the consent of the legal representative/guardian, if present, should be requested. When prior consent of the participant is not possible, and the legal representative/guardian is not available, enrolment of the participant should require measures described in the protocol and/or elsewhere, with documented approval/favorable opinion by the research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)), to protect the participant’s rights, safety, and well-being and to ensure compliance with applicable regulatory requirements. The participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible. Consent to continue and other consent as appropriate, should be requested. OMREC and ResNo251 similarly state that the EC (CEP) is responsible for approving the conditions or limits in which the informed consent should be approved in an emergency situation, and the investigator should inform the research participant in a timely manner about participation in the study.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 24, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.  

Overview

As set forth in LawNo14.874, in all Brazilian clinical trials, research participants from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. Vulnerability is defined as a condition in which a person or group of people has reduced capacity to make decisions and to oppose resistance in the research situation as a result of individual, psychological, economic, cultural, social, or political factors. ResNo466 also defines vulnerability as the state of individuals or groups who, for any reason or motive, have their capacity for self-determination reduced or impeded, or are in any way prevented from resisting, especially with regard to free and informed consent.

According to the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, vulnerable participants are characterized as those who may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of the benefits associated with their involvement in a clinical trial, or of a retaliatory response from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate. These participants may include those who are members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, dental, chemistry, pharmacy, biology, and nursing students, subordinate personnel in a hospital or laboratory, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and individuals who are arrested or imprisoned. Some other vulnerable participants may include those with incurable diseases, people in convalescent homes, the unemployed or indigent, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minorities, homeless people, seasonal workers, refugees, minors, and those who cannot give their consent.

Pursuant to LawNo14.874, the inclusion of participants in vulnerable research situations, even if circumstantially, is subject to the following conditions being met:

An informed consent form (ICF) signed by a legal representative, or one judicially appointed
The research is essential for the population represented by the participant in a vulnerable situation, and it is not possible to obtain data of comparable validity through the participation of adults capable of giving their consent or through the use of other research methods
The research participant should be provided with information, when possible and to the extent of their ability to understand, respecting their decision to participate, expressed through an ICF, whenever they are able to evaluate and decide on the information received
The responsible investigator and the legal representative/guardian of the incapacitated person will co-sign a communication to the Public Prosecutor's Office, informing the schedule for the incapacitated person's participation in the research
LawNo14.874, ResNo466, and BRA-28, specify that the research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)) must pay special attention to protecting participants who are from vulnerable populations. LawNo14.874 also notes that EC (CEP) members may invite external experts and representatives of vulnerable groups to give their opinion on specific issues related to research projects, but these individuals will not have the right to vote. Additionally, per ResNo466, vulnerable individuals or groups should not be included when the desired information can be obtained through participants with full autonomy, unless the research can benefit the health of the vulnerable population represented.

See CLNo1-2021 for National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) guidelines for investigators and ECs (CEPs) related to contact with research participants (e.g., obtaining informed consent and ensuring confidentiality) and/or data collection at any phase of a research study in a virtual environment. See also CLNo039 for CONEP guidance on accessing and using a participant’s medical records for research purposes while ensuring compliance with privacy and confidentiality standards. The guideline also states that all participants should be treated with dignity, respect for their autonomy, and ensure protection for vulnerable populations.

Indigenous Peoples

LawNo14.874 requires that the Public Prosecutor's Office be notified, as applicable, of the participation of a member of an indigenous group in research.

As delineated in ResNo304, special attention should be paid when conducting a study involving indigenous peoples in Brazil. Studies involving this population should comply with ethical requirements while also considering the unique qualities of each community. The benefits and advantages resulting from conducting a study with indigenous peoples must also meet the needs of individuals or groups targeted by the study or of related societies, and/or the country as a whole. Investigators should take into account the need to promote and maintain the well-being of participants while protecting and preserving their biological, cultural, individual, and collective health while also contributing to the development of the participants’ knowledge and abilities. Refer to ResNo304 for detailed information on research and protection requirements when conducting a study with this population.

See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
LawNo8.069 (also known as the Statute of Children and Adolescents) states that a child is a person up to 12 years of age, and a teenager is one between 12 and 18 years of age.

As per ResNo466 and OMREC, when the research participant is a child, the child’s parent/legal guardian must sign the informed consent form. However, per OMREC, all pediatric participants should be informed to the fullest extent possible about the study in language and terms that they are easily able to understand. The child’s opinion must be considered, even though the child may not be deemed competent to give consent. ResNo466 further notes that in cases where clarification is necessary for research with child and adolescent participants, investigators must provide a clear justification for their choice, specified in the protocol and approved by the EC (CEP), and by the National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)), when applicable. In these cases, the stages of clarification and free and informed consent must be followed, through the legal representatives/guardians of those invited to participate in the research, to preserve their right to information to the extent of their capacity.

In addition, per CLNo11, the CONEP has established guidelines related to the process of obtaining consent from research participants under 18 years of age. The process of consent to participate is essential and should be addressed to those who exercise parental responsibility or guardianship, without prejudice to listening to the participant under 18 years of age. In addition, the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, states that when a clinical trial includes minors who can only be enrolled with the consent of the participant’s parent/legal guardian, the participant should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with the participant’s understanding and, if capable, the participant should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

Per BRA-73, Brazil has also implemented the ICH Harmonised Guideline Addendum to ICH E11: Clinical Investigation of Medicinal Products in the Pediatric Population E11 (R1) (BRA-74).

Assent Requirements

ResNo466 indicates that an assent form should be used to obtain informed consent from minors or those legally incapable of giving their own consent. The form should be prepared in a language that is accessible to minors or those legally incapable of giving their own consent. After the form is explained and the research study is clarified, the child participants should provide their consent to participate in the study, without the influence of their parent or legal guardian.

CLNo11 further specifies that investigators must ensure the assent is made in the form of an invitation without any degree of pressure or coercion, and written in simple, easy-to-understand language to ensure adequate comprehension of the research. The assent process must consider the understanding capacity of the participant under 18 years of age. Pursuant to LawNo8.069 which upholds the principle that the full protection of children and adolescents is the duty of everyone including public authorities and society in general, CLNo11 delineates that seven (7) years is the minimum age for the obligation to obtain the term or registration of consent. The guideline also recommends an assessment of each research participant’s needs, capabilities, and emotional maturity for the presentation of different terms or records of assent according to the age group (from childhood and adolescence), complexity of the research, and for analysis by the CEP/CONEP system. See CLNo11 for additional details.

See the Personal Data Protection section for requirements on processing personal data of children and adolescents.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
As delineated in LawNo14.874 and ResNo466, research with pregnant women will be preceded by similar research with women outside the gestational period, except when the pregnancy or the unborn child is the fundamental object of the research. Additionally, per LawNo14.874, this research will only be permitted when the foreseeable risk to the health of the pregnant woman or the unborn child is minimal.

ResNo466 also specifies that any Brazilian clinical studies involving women of childbearing age or who are pregnant, require additional safeguards to ensure that the participants are fully aware of the risks and that the research assesses the risks and benefits as well as any potential impact on fertility, pregnancy, the embryo or fetus, labor, lactation, and the newborn. Further, the investigator(s) should also ensure that female participants have the right to participate in the research without the use of compulsory contraceptives, if they have expressly indicated that they are free from the risk of pregnancy and sexual practices, or they are sexually active in a non-reproductive way.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
According to the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, prisoners are included as an example of a vulnerable population that may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation, or of a retaliatory response from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate.

ResNo466 also states that freedom of consent must be guaranteed to those research participants, including prisoners, who are fully competent but are exposed to specific constraints or have restricted autonomy. These participants must have the freedom to decide whether to participate without any fear of reprisal.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
According to ResNo466, the research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)) must approve the participation of research participants who are mentally or physically incapable of giving consent, and sufficient justification must be provided for involving this population in a study. In cases where clarification is necessary to obtain adequate consent from participants with mental disorders or diminished decision-making capacity, investigators must provide a clear justification for their choice, specified in the protocol and approved by the EC (CEP), and by the National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)), when applicable. In these cases, the stages of clarification and free and informed consent must be followed, through the legal representatives/guardians of those invited to participate in the research, to preserve their right to information to the extent their capacity.

In addition, the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, states that when a clinical trial includes participants who can only be enrolled in the trial with the consent of the legal representative/guardian (e.g., patients with severe dementia), the participant should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with the participant’s understanding and, if capable, the participant should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

Per CLNo11, CONEP has also established guidelines related to the essential process of obtaining consent from research participants with a "lack of autonomy", permanent or temporary, to consent.

CLNo11 further states researchers must ensure assent is obtained in the form of an invitation without any pressure or coercion, and written in simple, easy-to-understand language to ensure adequate comprehension of the research. See CLNo11 for additional information.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
As per LawNo14.874, ResNo945, the G-BioIProdManual, and the G-SynthDrugProdManual, an investigational product (IP) is defined as an experimental drug, placebo, active comparator, or any other product to be used in a clinical trial. (Note: Experimental drugs are a subset of IPs, however, the sources and the profile use the two (2) terms interchangeably.)

In addition, the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, states that an IP is a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial, including a product with a marketing authorization when used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a way different from the approved form, or when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
Manufacturing

As stated in LawNo14.874 and ResNo945, the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) in Brazil. ANVISA approves the manufacture of an IP as part of its review and approval of the clinical trial application (Clinical Drug Development Dossier (Dossiê de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Medicamento (DDCM)).

ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual explain that the sponsor must provide ANVISA with a declaration that the IP and the placebo used in completed or ongoing clinical trials were manufactured in accordance with good manufacturing practice (GMP), as delineated in ResNo658, and that the IP and the placebo to be used in clinical trials in Brazil will also be manufactured in accordance with GMP. If there is a GMP Certificate or equivalent document for the IP, it must be attached to the DDCM or to the petition for substantial modification to the IP, if applicable. Per ResNo945, ANVISA may carry out GMP inspections of the IP produced in order to verify the information and data presented in the DDCM and determine whether the IP is sufficiently safe to be administered to the clinical trial participants. See RegNo136, which provides complementary GMP for IPs to be followed in addition to ResNo658. See the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for DDCM and substantial IP modification submission requirements.

In addition, per BRA-55, ANVISA is a member of the Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S). Per BRA-100, as a PIC/S member, ANVISA meets internationally harmonized good manufacturing practice (GMP) inspection standards and quality systems of inspectorates in the field of medicinal products for human or veterinary use. Refer to BRA-55 for additional information.

Per BRA-73, Brazil has also implemented the ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Good Manufacturing Practice Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (Q7) (BRA-112).

Import

Per LawNo14.874, ResNo945, and the G-DDCMManual, ANVISA is responsible for authorizing the import of IPs. As explained in ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, for each DDCM submitted, a single Import Document (DI) will be issued, mentioning all of the clinical trials to be conducted in Brazil. The DI is a document to be used in IP import or export requests, when necessary. The DI lists the IPs to be imported for use in each clinical trial linked to the DDCM. ANVISA will issue the DI within 30 business days from the date of filing of the DEEC petition for the import of IPs necessary for carrying out clinical development, which may be before the approval or rejection of the DDCM and the respective DEEC petitions are published in the Official Gazette of the Union (Diário Oficial da União (DOU)). The import of products before publication in the DOU is at the discretion and responsibility of the sponsor. The G-DDCMManual also notes that the early issuance of the DI applies to the DDCM and DEECs submitted together with the DDCM. Therefore, this measure does not apply to cases in which DEECs are submitted after the approval of the DDCM.

Additionally, as described in ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, if a company is interested in importing IP(s) prior to DDCM approval, the sponsor must attach a declaration of commitment along with the DDCM documentation stating that the IP will only be distributed to research centers after the DDCM and DEEC are approved and ANVISA’s authorization is published in the DOU. In the event ANVISA rejects the DDCM, the corresponding DEEC, and prior import of the IP(s) authorization, the sponsor must submit a petition to amend the DDCM process informing ANVISA of the destination or destruction of the IP(s). This document must be submitted to ANVISA within a maximum period of 60 business days from the publication of the DDCM rejection and respective DEEC, and must contain information on the destination given to the IPs including their respective quantities compatible with what was previously imported. ResNo945 further states that changing the import purpose of goods and products is prohibited without ANVISA’s authorization. Any change to the IP information contained in the DI may only be made upon request to ANVISA’s clinical research technical area. Furthermore, the use of any IP imported by means of a DI prior to the approval of the DDCM and DEEC petition published in the DOU, constitutes a health violation and subjects the offender to the penalties provided for in LawNo6.437, and in specific health regulations, without prejudice to applicable civil and criminal sanctions.

BRA-95 also provides instructions to sponsors or the legal representatives in Brazil on completing the expiration date (or shelf life) information for imported IPs in the Clinical Trial Submission Form (FAEC) (BRA-22). The expiration date (shelf life) is frequently updated, and is therefore often linked to inconsistencies and requests for clarification of requirements by those responsible for importing drugs and products for clinical trials. See BRA-95 for detailed information on stability requirements and instructions on completing BRA-22. Additionally, the updated BRA-22 requires sponsors to complete information on the clinical trial’s type of risk category according to RegNo338. RegNo338 provides criteria for requesting ANVISA review of DDCM, DEEC, or substantial IP modification petitions using the optimized analysis procedure by regulatory trust practices (Reliance) or by risk and complexity of the clinical trial. See RegNo338 for detailed risk category criteria. See also Scope of Assessment and Submission Process sections for ANVISA’s optimized analysis procedure requirements.

Pursuant to ResNo945, imported IPs under investigation for exclusive use in clinical trials are subject to the registration of licenses, permits, certificates, and other documents specified on the Integrated Foreign Trade System (SISCOMEX)’s Single Foreign Trade Portal (BRA-80); are subject to ANVISA inspection; and must comply with ResNo208 (amending ResNo81). ResNo208 (amending ResNo81) and ResNo613 (amending ResNo172) delineate the procedures associated with importing IPs for clinical research purposes following ANVISA’s approval of a DDCM. ResNo172 specifies that the import of goods and products intended for research involving human beings that have been approved by ANVISA will be analyzed within 48 hours after arriving in Brazil and after compliance with relevant legal requirements. Additionally, imports intended for clinical trials whose objective is to register or alter product registration will be analyzed within five (5) days after protocol approval and compliance with legal requirements. Refer to ResNo208 (amending ResNo81) and ResNo613 (amending ResNo172) for detailed import procedures.

As described in ResNo74 and BRA-108, the import petition must be submitted electronically. Per the G-LPCOImprtPetition, the first step in initiating ANVISA’s import protocol process is applying for an import license (Licença de Importação (LI)) via BRA-80. As indicated in BRA-108, the electronic petition must include the documentation specified in ResNo208 (amending ResNo81) and other relevant legislation. ResNo208 (amending ResNo81) explains that the following documentation must be included with the petition:

Copy of the Special Communication (Comunicação Especial CE)), Specific Special Communication (Comunicado Especial Específico (CEE)), and Document for Importation of Product(s) under Investigation from DDCM
Knowledge of cargo on board
Commercial invoice
In cases of imports carried out by those other than the DDCM holder, document of delegation of import responsibilities
BRA-108 also indicates that in the case of documents already in electronic form, they should be attached as individual files for each LI request in BRA-80. The documents must be attached, preferably, in the order indicated in the checklist of the procedure specified in ResNo208 (amending ResNo81). Refer to BRA-108 for detailed documentation presentation requirements. See also ResNo208 and ResNo81 for detailed import documentation requirements.

Per the G-LPCOImprtPetition, once the LI is registered, the user also must make a request in the Licenses, Permissions, Certificates and Other Documents (Licença, Permissão, Certificado e Outros Documentos (LPCO)) module in SISCOMEX (BRA-80). The G-LPCOImprtPetition explains how the LPCO registration will eventually be integrated with the LI registration, however, at this time, it is necessary for the user to link the LI with the LPCO in order to initiate the import petition protocol in ANVISA’s Solicita Electronic Petition Request System (BRA-56). Refer to the G-LPCOImprtPetition for detailed instructions on registering the LI and the LPCO in BRA-80. See also BRA-106 for additional information on using BRA-80 and obtaining an LI, and See also BRA-109, for additional background on linking imported medicinal products and controlled substances to BRA-80.

As described in BRA-47 and the G-LPCOImprtPetition, users are required to complete the company registration process prior to submitting an import petition via ANVISA’s Solicita Electronic Petition Request System (BRA-56). BRA-47 provides step-by-step instructions on company registration along with the information provided in BRA-105. BRA-107 also provides additional information on registering a company with the National Register of Legal Entities (Cadastro Nacional da Pessoa Jurídica (CNPJ)).

Per ResNo945, imported IPs that are subject to special control as referenced in OrdNo344 (Lists A1, A2, A3, B1, B2, C3, D1, E, and F), must comply with ResNo208 (amending ResNo81) and ResNo659. OrdNo344 defines the substances included in these lists as follows: "A1" and "A2" (permitted narcotics), "A3”, "B1", and "B2" (permitted psychotropics), "C3" (immunosuppressants), "D1" (permitted precursors), "E" (plants that can originate narcotic and/or psychotropic substances), and "F" (substances for prohibited use in Brazil). As indicated in BRA-57, ANVISA has also adopted a protocol for requests for authorization to import medicines and substances subject to special control. See BRA-57 for details. Additionally, the G-ImprtMeds provides information on ANVISA’s Import Authorization Office for Medication (PAFME)) submission requirements for imported IPs subject to special control (e.g., medicines, including advanced therapy products and human cells and tissues for therapeutic purposes). According to the G-ImprtMeds, although these IPs are subject to PAFME approval, imported IPs intended exclusively for clinical trials as well as those being used for expanded access, compassionate use, and post-study IP programs are exempt from ANVISA’s operating authorization (AE) requirements, provided that the company holds an ANVISA import authorization required for the exemption request and for carrying out one of these activities. See the G-ImprtMeds for details.

LawNo10.742 (amending LawNo6.360) also notes that new drugs, intended exclusively for experimental use and under medical supervision, may be imported with the express authorization of the Ministry of Health (MOH) and are exempted from registration. This exemption will only be valid for up to three (3) years. Following this period, the product must be registered or be subject to a penalty of seizure to be determined by the MOH.

Advanced Therapy Products

Per ResNo506, advanced therapy products refer to medicines for human use that are based on genes, tissues, or cells. As delineated in LawNo14.874, for clinical trial purposes, the export and import of experimental advanced therapy products must be authorized by ANVISA and by regulatory bodies, under specific regulations. Per G-LPCOImprtPetition, applicants may initiate an import petition via ANVISA’s Solicita Electronic Petition Request System (BRA-56) to request an import license for advanced therapy products. The process involves obtaining an LI via the steps discussed earlier in this section followed by making a request through the LPCO module of BRA-80, and linking the LI to the LPCO registration. The user will then be able to initiate an import petition. See G-LPCOImprtPetition for additional information on registering an LI and LPCO for advanced therapy products via BRA-80, and then initiating an import petition via BRA-56. Refer to ResNo506 for information on ANVISA’s role in reviewing and approving clinical trial applications submitted for studies using advanced therapy products.

Per ResNo172, ANVISA will analyze and release imported goods and products intended for use in human subjects research within 48 hours after arrival in Brazil, provided that the legal requirements are met and that the purpose of the research is not to register or change the product registration. Also specified in ResNo208 (amending ResNo81) and ResNo613 (amending ResNo172), is the requirement that the investigator and institution submit the imported products through one (1) of the following methods: BRA-80 or Express Shipping. As indicated earlier in this section, the import petition must be submitted electronically and should comply with the documentation submission requirements discussed above and include the information provided in ResNo74 and BRA-108. While each import option has different documentation requirements, they all require the submission of an electronic petition for import, a commercial invoice, a signed statement of responsibility (see ResNo81 (Chapter XXVII) and ResNo172 (Annex I)), research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)) approval, and where applicable, National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) approval. See ResNo172 and ResNo81 for additional information on the required items based on the import method used. See BRA-38 for additional information on accessing ANVISA’s electronic petitioning request systems.

Note: Brazil is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (BRA-63), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see BRA-81.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
Investigator's Brochure

In accordance with ResNo945, the G-DDCMManual, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, the sponsor is responsible for providing investigators with an Investigator’s Brochure (IB). The IB must provide coverage for the following areas (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties
Pharmaceutical aspects
Pharmacokinetics and metabolism
Toxicological effects in any animal species tested under a single dose study, a repeated dose study, or a special study
Results of clinical pharmacokinetic studies
Information regarding safety, pharmacodynamics, efficacy, adverse events data, and dose responses obtained from prior clinical trials in humans
For phase 1 clinical trials involving the use of a drug for the first time in humans (First-in-human, FIH), attach reports of toxicity and detailed pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies, as a complement to the IB as soon as they are available
Reference Safety Information
Additionally, per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, the sponsor must submit an updated IB to the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) in cases where clinical trials aim to support a new therapeutic indication, an expansion of use to a new population, a new dosage regimen, new associations, or any post-registration change that requires clinical data. The updated IB should be submitted with the changes highlighted (track-changes format), or a specific IB, by means of a secondary petition to the clinical trial application (Clinical Drug Development Dossier (Dossiê de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Medicamento (DDCM))) using the subject code of “10821 - ENSAIOS CLÍNICOS - Notificação de Atualização de Brochura do Investigador” (10821 - CLINICAL TRIALS - Notification of Update of Investigator's Brochure), per the G-DDCMManual. BRA-28 also notes that the sponsor should update the IB as significant new information becomes available. See ResNo945, the G-DDCMManual, and BRA-28 for detailed IB requirements.

Quality Management

Pursuant to ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, the sponsor is responsible for submitting an Investigational Drug Development Plan (PDME) to ANVISA as part of the DDCM. The PDME should contain the following:

Active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) or active substance name, including IP category (e.g., synthetic, biological, specific, dynamized, medicinal gas, phytotherapeutic or radiopharmaceutical), therapeutic class, pharmaceutical form, concentration and route of administration
Mechanism of action and indications to be studied
General objectives and planned duration of clinical development
A list, in tabular form, of the countries where clinical development has been submitted, including details of the regulatory and ethical approval status, and respective clarifications or justifications in cases of approval under reservation, disapproval, interruption, or cancellation of clinical development in any of the countries where it was submitted
Scientific advisory opinion of any foreign regulatory authority, if any, on the clinical development
In cases of linking new Specific Clinical Trial Dossiers (Dossiê Específico de Ensaio Clínico (DEECs)) to the DDCM, and exclusion of protocols cited in the PDME in which the corresponding DEECs were not submitted, the updated version of the PDME must be submitted, by means of a secondary petition to DDCM petition
Refer to the G-DDCMManual and the G-BiolProdManual for detailed PDME submission requirements. See BRA-128 for the Investigational Drug Development Plan (PDME) form.

ResNo945 also specifies that an Investigational Medicinal Product Dossier (IMPD) or Investigational Product Dossier (DPI) must be submitted to ANVISA as part of the clinical trial application (primary DDCM petition). The IMPD or DPI should include the following information on the IP:

Description of the pharmaceutical form and composition
Pharmacotechnical development
Manufacturing process and in-process controls
Quality control of excipients
Quality control of the IP
Standards/reference materials or chemicals
Packaging material
Results of stability studies
Documentation relating to the control of transmissibility of Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (TSE), in accordance with current health regulations or justifications for the exemption of this document
Per ResNo945, the sponsor should also include in the IMPD or DPI the manufacturing and process controls, quality control, and stability study results for the API or active substance; and the manufacturing process and analytical controls, packaging material, and stability study results of the placebo and modified comparator drug. See ResNo945 for additional information. In the event the IP is already registered in Brazil, the IMPD will be waived. However, in cases where there is a substantial change in the quality of the IP in relation to the registered drug, all documentation and information supporting the change(s) must be presented in the DDCM. ANIVSA requires the IMPD or DPI information to be presented following a logical structure that facilitates technical analysis, with the recommended format being Module 3 of the Common Technical Document (CTD) (BRA-133). Per ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, ANVISA will also issue a supplementary normative act regarding the quality requirements of the IP, API, or active substance.

In addition to the initial PDME and IMPD submissions, the sponsor must submit to ANVISA any substantial IP modifications which may potentially have an impact on the quality or safety of the IP, active comparator, or placebo, as delineated in ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual. These submissions must be linked as a secondary petition to the corresponding DDCM. Further, the optimized analysis procedure based on regulatory trust practices (Reliance) is also applicable to secondary petitions for substantial IP modifications. See BRA-127 for the Petition Form for Substantial Modification to the Product under investigation. For detailed information on substantial IP modifications, see the Scope of Assessment, Submission Process, and Submission Content sections.

Per BRA-28, the sponsor must also ensure that the products are manufactured in accordance with Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) as laid down in ResNo658. ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual indicate that if there is a GMP certificate or equivalent document for the IP, it must be attached to the DDCM or to the petition for substantial IP modification, if applicable. BRA-28 also states that if significant formulation changes are made in the IP(s) or comparator product(s) during the course of clinical development, the results of any additional studies of the formulated product(s) (e.g., stability, dissolution rate, bioavailability) needed to assess whether these changes would significantly alter the pharmacokinetic profile of the product should be available prior to the use of the new formulation in clinical trials and submitted to ANVISA for review and authorization.

See also the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for DDCM submission instructions and documentation requirements. See also RegNo136, which provides complementary GMP for IPs to be followed in addition to ResNo658.

In addition, per ResNo205, the DDCM submitted to ANVISA to conduct a clinical trial using IPs for rare diseases should also be accompanied by a request for GMP certification. See ResNo205 and ResNo811 (which partially amends ResNo205) for detailed submission information.

International GMP Compliance

Per BRA-55, ANVISA is a member of the Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S). Per BRA-100, as a PIC/S member, ANVISA meets internationally harmonized GMP inspection standards and quality systems of inspectorates in the field of medicinal products for human or veterinary use. Refer to BRA-55 for additional information.

Furthermore, in accordance with ResNo741, RegNo292 establishes specific criteria and procedures for defining Equivalent Foreign Regulatory Authorities (Autoridades Reguladoras Estrangeiras Equivalentes (AREEs)) for the purposes of the health inspection and Certification of Good Manufacturing Practices (Certificação de Boas Práticas de Fabricação (CBPF)) of APIs, cannabis products for medicinal purposes, medicines, and biological products. To comply with health inspection and CBPF criteria, AREEs must be regulatory authorities or international entities that are members of the PIC/S and the ICH (See Annex in RegNo292 for list of approved AREEs). See RegNo292 for detailed information on AREEs for the purposes of health inspections and GMP certificates. Also, see BRA-64 for additional information. ResNo945 also notes that the manufacturing process of the API and the IP approved by an AREE must comply with the guidelines and principles described in the current ICH guides, where applicable, according to the clinical development phase. See the Scope of Assessment section for additional information on AREE requirements.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Brazil must comply with the requirements set forth in ResNo945, the G-DDCMManual, RegNo136, the G-BiolProdManual, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945. As described in the RegNo136 and the G-BiolProdManual, the following labeling information must be included on the primary package label (or any intermediate packaging), and the outer packaging (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Name, address, and telephone number of sponsor, contract research organization (CRO) (clinical research representative organization (CRPO) in Brazil), or investigator (the main contact for information about the product, clinical trial and emergencies)
Presentation, pharmaceutical form, route of administration, quantity of dosage units, and the drug name/identifier and concentration/potency in the case of open studies
Batch and/or product identification code
Clinical trial reference code
Clinical trial participant identification code, and where relevant, the visit number
Investigator name, if not included in earlier contact information
Instructions for use (reference may be made to an explanatory pamphlet or other document that guides the trial participants or person administering the IP
Storage conditions
Period of use (use limit date, expiration date or retest date, as applicable), considering, at least, in the month/year format, and in a way that avoids any ambiguity
Warning phrases in capital letters such as: “For clinical trial use only” or “EXCLUSIVE USE IN CLINICAL TRIALS”
“KEEP OUT OF REACH OF CHILDREN”, except when the IP is for use in trials in which the product is not taken home by clinical trial participants
RegNo136 further explains that the labeling information must appear on the primary and secondary packaging, unless the IP is packaged as follows:

Provided inside a primary package, together with the secondary package, and the secondary package contains the labeling data, or
The primary packaging is a blister or small units, such as ampoules, on which the labeling information cannot be displayed, and requires the outer packaging to be provided with a label containing this information
Additionally, as described in RegNo136, when the primary IP packaging is always combined with the secondary packaging, the secondary packaging should contain the following:

Name of the sponsor, CRO, or investigator
Presentation, route of administration (may be excluded for oral solid dosage forms), dosage, and in the case of open trials, the name/identifier of the IP and strength/potency
Batch and/or code number to identify the contents and packaging operation
A trial reference code allowing identification of the trial, site, investigator, and sponsor if not given elsewhere
The trial participant identification number/treatment number and where relevant, the visit number
As delineated in RegNo136, if the primary container takes the form of blister packs or small units, such as ampoules, and cannot be displayed, the outer packaging should be provided bearing a label with this information. However, the primary container should bear the following information:

Name of the sponsor, CRO, or investigator
Route of administration (may be excluded for oral solid dosage forms), dosage, and, in the case of open trials, name/identifier and concentration/potency
Batch and/or code number for identifying the content and packaging operation
Clinical trial reference code for study, site, investigator, and sponsor identification, if not provided elsewhere
Trial participant identification number/treatment number and where relevant, the visit number
In addition, per RegNo136, the labeling information must be in the language of the country where the clinical trial takes place, however, other languages ​​may be included. By comparison, the G-BiolProdManual indicates that all of the text labeling must be written in Portuguese. RegNo136 and the G-BiolProdManual further note that symbols, pictograms, and warnings may also be included on both the primary and outer packaging. Also, the primary contact’s address and telephone number for IP or clinical trial information, and for emergency unblinding, need not appear on the label when the trial participant has been provided with a leaflet or card containing this information and has been instructed to keep this contact in their possession at all times. ResNo945 further states that the sponsor must ensure the IP, modified active comparator drug, or placebo be coded and labeled in a manner that protects blinding, if applicable, and characterizes them as products under clinical investigation. According to BRA-28, the sponsor should also ensure that the IP(s) (including active comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable) is characterized as appropriate to the stage of development of the product(s), is manufactured in accordance with any applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP), and is coded and labelled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable. The IP(s) coding system should include a mechanism that permits rapid IP(s) identification in case of a medical emergency but does not permit undetectable breaks of the blinding.

As explained in RegNo136 and the G-BiolProdManual, additional information, warnings, or handling instructions may also be displayed. The additional label must indicate the new expiration date and repeat the batch number. The additional label may be superimposed over the old expiration date but may not be superimposed over the original batch number for quality control reasons. This operation may only be carried out at a duly authorized manufacturing site. If duly justified, the operation may be carried out in a location authorized by the sponsor, a pharmacist, or other authorized health professional. This operation may also be carried out at the research site under the supervision of the clinical trial center pharmacist, or another health professional, in accordance with national regulations, or when this is not possible, by the clinical trial monitor(s), who must be adequately trained. Furthermore, this operation must be carried out in accordance with GMP principles, standard and specific operating procedures, and under contract, if applicable, and must be verified by a second person. Additional labeling must be adequately documented in the test documentation and batch records.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

As delineated in LawNo14.874, medicines should be packaged, stored, and disposed of in accordance with the applicable regulations. As specified in ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual, the investigational products (IPs) must be stored in a protected area, under the sponsor’s control, and may only be distributed to the locations where they will be used following the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA))’s approval of the clinical trial applications (Clinical Drug Development Dossier (Dossiê de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Medicamento (DDCM))) and Specific Clinical Trial Dossier (Dossiê Específico de Ensaio Clínico (DEEC)) petitions published in the Official Gazette of the Union (Diário Oficial da União (DOU)). If a company is interested in importing IP(s) prior to DDCM approval, along with the DDCM documentation, the sponsor must submit a declaration of commitment to distribute to clinical trial centers and use IPs only after authorization from the corresponding DDCM and DEEC, when import is authorized prior to publication of the approval/rejection in the DOU. The sponsor is also responsible for acquiring a sufficient quantity of the IP and other supplies to be used in the clinical trial, and may only distribute them to the institutions informed in the approved Clinical Trial Submission Form (FAEC) (BRA-22) and authorized by the research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)).

Additionally, per ResNo945, the sponsor is responsible for the final disposal of medicines and products that were not used in the clinical trial. ResNo945 and the G-DDCMManual further state that in the event ANVISA rejects the DDCM and corresponding DEEC, and the IP(s) were imported prior to approval, the sponsor must submit a petition to amend the DDCM process with a document informing ANVISA of the destination or destruction of the IP(s). This document must be submitted to ANVISA within a maximum period of 60 business days from the publication of the DDCM rejection and respective DEEC, and must contain information on the destination given to the IPs including their respective quantities compatible with what was previously imported.

The International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28), which Brazil has adopted per ResNo945, also states that the sponsor is responsible for supplying the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the IP(s). The sponsor should not supply an investigator/institution with the IP(s) until the sponsor obtains all required documentation (e.g., approval/favorable opinion from EC (CEP) and ANVISA). The sponsor should also ensure that written procedures include instructions that the investigator/institution should follow for the handling and storage of IP(s) for the trial and documentation thereof. The procedures should address adequate and safe receipt, handling, storage, dispensing, and retrieval of unused product from participants, and return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor (or alternative disposition if authorized by the sponsor and in compliance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s)).

BRA-28 further explains that the sponsor should:

Ensure timely delivery of the IP(s) to the investigator(s)
Take steps to ensure IP stability over the period of use
Maintain sufficient quantities of the IP(s) to reconfirm specifications, if needed, and maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics. To the extent stability permits, samples should be retained either until the analyses of the trial data are complete or as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), whichever represents the longer retention period
Determine acceptable storage temperatures, storage conditions (e.g., protection from light), storage times, reconstitution fluids and procedures, and devices for product infusion, if any. The sponsor should inform all involved parties (e.g., monitors, investigators, pharmacists, storage managers) of these determinations
Ensure IP is packaged to prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage
Ensure the IP is manufactured according to any applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP) (see ResNo658 and RegNo136, which provides complementary GMP for IPs to be followed in addition to ResNo658)
Ensure proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP(s)
Refer to BRA-28 for detailed sponsor-related IP requirements.

Record Requirements

Per BRA-28, the sponsor should comply with the following records requirements:

Maintain records that document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP(s)
Maintain a system for retrieving IPs and documenting this retrieval (e.g., for deficient product recall, reclaim after trial completion, and expired product recovery)
Maintain a system for the disposition of unused IP(s) and for the documentation of this disposition
According to BRA-28, the sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and institution(s) in writing of the need for record retention and should notify the investigator(s) and institution(s) in writing when the trial-related records are no longer needed. Sponsor-specific essential documents should also be retained until at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application, until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications, or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of the IP’s clinical development.

In addition, per BRA-28, the investigator/institution and/or a pharmacist, or other appropriate individual who is designated by the investigator/institution, should also maintain records of the IP's delivery to the trial site, the inventory at the site, the use by each participant, and the return to the sponsor or alternative disposition of unused product(s). These records should include dates, quantities, batch/serial numbers, expiration dates (if applicable), and the unique code numbers assigned to the IP(s) and trial participants. Investigators should maintain records that document adequately that the participants were provided the doses specified by the protocol and reconcile all IP(s) received from the sponsor.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
As per OrdNo2201, ResNo504, ResNo441, and the G-BiolMatTransprt, a specimen is defined as any human biological material such as organs, tissues, cells, body fluids, excreta, and other fluids of human origin obtained from a single participant at a particular time. ResNo836 adds that these biological samples are intended to be used for laboratory or quality control tests.

Additionally, per ResNo504, human biological material is classified as Category A or B infectious biological material, or Category Risk Minimum. Category A includes materials where exposure can cause permanent disability or fatal disease to humans and animals. Category B includes those materials not listed in Category A such as samples suspected or known to contain infectious agents causing diseases in humans. Category Risk Minimum or “exempt human specimens” include biological materials from healthy individuals. Human biological materials must also be classified according to the World Health Organization (WHO)’s risk classification diagram available in the WHO’s Guidance on Regulations for the Transport of Infectious Substances (BRA-54).

The G-BiolMatTransprt also states that these materials are not considered hazardous if they are unlikely to cause disease in humans or animals. However, they are considered infectious substances, therefore dangerous materials, if through exposure to them, these substances can spread diseases.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.  

Import/Export

As set forth in ResNo208 (amending ResNo81) and ResNo172, the National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária (ANVISA)) is responsible for authorizing the import of human biological materials for clinical research purposes. ResNo208 (amending ResNo81) and ResNo613 (amending ResNo172) state that the import license will be carried out through the Integrated Foreign Trade System (SISCOMEX)’s Single Foreign Trade Portal (BRA-80) and express shipping. The following documentation is required to be submitted by the investigator and institution:

Declaration from the importer with information on the Notice number (Special Notice (Comunicado Especial (CE)), Specific Special Notice (Comunicado Especial Específico (CEE)), Document for Import of Product(s) under investigation in the Clinical Drug Development Dossier (Dossiê de Desenvolvimento Clínico de Medicamento (DDCM)), or Dossier of Medical Device Clinical Investigation (DICD) issued by ANVISA
Bill of lading cargo
Commercial invoice
Research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)) approval, and where applicable, National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) approval
See ResNo208 (amending ResNo81) and ResNo613 (amending ResNo172) for additional import documentation requirements. See the Manufacturing & Import section for details on how to submit an electronic import petition via ANVISA’s Solicita Electronic Petition Request System (BRA-56).

ResNo172 further states that ANVISA will analyze and release human biological samples intended for use in clinical research within 48 hours after arrival in Brazil, provided that the legal requirements are met. Refer to ResNo81 and ResNo172 for additional required items depending on the import method used.

Other requirements described in ResNo81 and ResNo172 include, but are not limited to, compliance with packaging, transportation, and storage standards provided by manufacturer or supplier; a mandate that the investigator or institution provide a final destination for the materials in accordance with the legal provisions of environmental control; and in ResNo172, a prohibition on imports with accompanied and unaccompanied baggage.

As explained in ResNo504 and the G-BiolMatTransprt, the procedures for the import and export of human biological material should be determined by the biological material type and the mode of transport. Regardless of the mode of transport or material type, transport operations are required to be recorded and standardized through regularly updated written instructions. All documents and records of activities relating to human biological material transport equipment should be readily available to the health authorities, upon request. The biological material must be packed in a form that will preserve its integrity and stability and must be validated and approved by the supervisory technician. Per ResNo504, human biological material labeling should conform to the material type, risk classification, and specific requirements of the biological materials to be transported. The label for imported materials must be legible, understandable, and in English and Portuguese.

In addition to complying with ResNo504 and the G-BiolMatTransprt, human biological material transport should be conducted in accordance with legislation from applicable regulatory bodies including the Ministry of Transport (Ministério dos Transportes), the Ministry of Ports and Airports (Ministério dos Portos e Aeroportos), the National Land Transportation Agency (Agência Nacional de Transportes Terrestres (ANTT)), the National Civil Aviation Agency (Agência Nacional de Aviação Civil (Anac)), and the National Waterway Transport Agency (Agência Nacional de Transportes Aquaviários (ANTAQ)). Refer to the G-BiolMatTransprt for detailed import and export transport requirements.

Refer to ResNo504 and the G-BiolMatTransprt for detailed instructions on shipping biological materials within these categories. See also ResNo836 for detailed transport requirements relating to human cells and advanced therapy products, and BRA-97 for preparing reports on biobanking for research purposes.

Material Transfer Agreement

As set forth in LawNo14.874, human biological material and its associated information may be formally transferred to investigators, in accordance with the provisions of LawNo14.874 and other current regulations, through the execution of a Biological Material Transfer Agreement (Termo de Transferência de Material Biológico (TTMB)) and the presentation of proof of approval of the research project by the relevant ethical and regulatory bodies. OrdNo2201 defines a TTMB as a document duly approved by a research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)) and CONEP (CEP/CONEP system) when requested by an investigator in a research project submission. The investigator uses the TTMB to receive stored human biological material with its associated information, and assumes responsibility for its safekeeping and use, for guaranteeing respect for the person and confidentiality, and for providing the biobank with the information obtained in their research.

LawNo14.874 further explains that the samples and components of the human biological material and associated information that have been transferred may not be passed on to third parties by the initial recipient institution, except when a new TTMB is signed between the original sending institution and the new recipient institution. The transfer of human biological material from the sending institution to the recipient must follow current health regulations, without prejudice to specific regulations for each type of biological material and the method of transport. The sending and storage of human biological material to a research center located outside the country is the responsibility of the sponsor and is subject to the following conditions:

Compliance with national and international health legislation on the shipment and storage of biological material
Guarantee of access and use of biological material and its data, for scientific purposes, to researchers and national institutions
Compliance with national legislation, especially with regard to the prohibition of patenting and commercialization of biological material
OrdNo2201 also states that the transfer of stored human biological material is formalized through a specific term of transfer of responsibility between the legal representatives of the institutions involved. LawNo14.874 specifies that human biological material and its associated information used exclusively for a specific research purpose and stored in either a biorepository or a biobank, may be formally transferred to another biorepository or biobank in accordance with current regulations. In addition, OrdNo2201 specifies the sharing of stored human biological material and associated information between biobanks of partner institutions must follow the current regulations for the transportation, processing, and the use of human biological material applicable to the specimen. Additionally, the transfer of human biological material stored in a biobank to the biobank of another institution, depends on the approval of the ECs (CEPs) of the institutions involved.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: June 27, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Decree No. 12,651, of October 7, 2025 came into force on October 8, 2025, regulating LawNo14.874. For more information, see the News Tab at the top of the profile.  

In accordance with OrdNo2201, ResNo441, ResNo466, and ResNo340, prior to collecting, storing, or using a research participant’s human biological material, consent must be obtained from the participant or legal representative/guardian in writing. Per OrdNo2201, ResNo340, OMREC, and CLNo041, the informed consent form (ICF) is also known as the Free and Informed Consent Form (Termo de Consentimento Livre e Esclarecido (TCLE)) in Brazil. LawNo14.874 also states that biological material and research data will be used exclusively for the purpose provided for in the respective project, except when, in the TCLE, express authorization is granted for them to be used in future research, for exclusively scientific purposes, provided that the provisions of this LawNo14.874 and the applicable regulations are observed.

As delineated in OrdNo2201, ResNo441, and ResNo340, investigator(s) must also obtain research ethics committee (EC) (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa (CEP)) approval, and where applicable, National Research Ethics Commission (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (CONEP)) approval of a new research project involving human biological materials. Per ResNo340, if it is not possible to obtain the participant’s consent, a formal justification shall be presented to the EC (CEP) for evaluation.

LawNo14.874 indicates that the research participant has the following rights which must be included in the TCLE:

To be duly informed and enlightened, in a clear and objective manner, whenever deemed pertinent, about the object and the potential benefits and risks inherent in the disposal of their biological material
To have their health and physical and mental integrity protected during the biological material collection procedures
To withdraw consent for the storage and use of stored human biological material at any time, in writing and signed, without charge or loss, having the right to return the samples
To have access, at any time, without charge or prejudice, to information on the purposes of storage, including the names of the technical and institutional managers, the potential risks and benefits, the guarantees of conservation quality and the integrity of their biological material
To have access, at any time, without charge or prejudice, to information associated with their biological material and be informed and guided by researchers responsible for findings when the implications of this information could cause harm to their health, including genetic counseling when applicable
To have the privacy and confidentiality of their personal information guaranteed
To be promptly informed about the dissolution of the repository in which their biological material is stored
To be promptly informed about the transfer, loss, alteration, or disposal of their biological material
To designate legal representatives who may consent to the use and disposal of their biological material, and to have access to such materials and their associated information in the event of death or incapacitating condition
To be informed, at the time of signing the TCLE, about the possibility of providing or not providing consent for possible future uses of their data and biological material in research
To be informed, at the time of signing the TCLE, about the possibility of authorizing or not sending their data and biological material to a research center located outside the country
LawNo14.874 also notes that consent for the disposal of human biological material and its data, in life or post mortem, must be formalized by means of a TCLE, and occur in a free, altruistic, and informed manner, in accordance with the LGPD.

In addition, per ResNo441 and ResNo340, investigators should explain the possibility of using the participant’s stored genetic materials in a new research project in the ICF. In this case, the participant will be contacted for further authorization or their waiver. If it is impossible to obtain either one (1) of these documents, this fact shall be justified to the EC (CEP). The investigator(s) is also required to explain to the participant that the material will only be used upon approval of a new project by the EC (CEP) and when necessary, CONEP. OrdNo2201 further states that when it is not possible to contact the research participant, the EC (CEP) must authorize use of the biological material stored in a biobank.

As described in ResNo340, the G-ClinProtocols-FAQs, and CLNo041, the ICF for genetic research projects must communicate the following information to the participant:

A clear explanation of the exams and tests that will be performed to identify genes, and clarification of the genetic materials to be studied and their possible correlation with the participant’s health
A guarantee of secrecy, privacy, and when necessary, anonymity
The provision of free genetic advice, planning, and clinical surveillance by responsible people
The type and degree of access to results by the participant, with the option to acknowledge this information or not
In the case of genetic material storage, the ICF should explain the possibility of the materials being used in a new research project and that the participant will be contacted for further authorization
Measures to be taken to protect participant data, exam, and test results, including limiting clinical report access to the involved investigators
Measures to be taken to protect the participant from any collective discrimination and/or stigmatization
The need for a separate ICF to be completed by each family member in the case of a family investigation. An explicit statement of the need for new consent for each study, or an explicit waiver of consent for each new study
CLNo041 further notes that for human genetics research, CONEP requires investigator(s) to be able to describe the genes studied in a grouped manner according to functionality or effect (e.g., genes related to the onset of cancer, inflammation, cell death, or response to treatment). In the case of studies involving large-scale genetic studies (e.g., complete genome or exoma sequencing), the ICF shall contain an explanation of the procedure to be performed in a language the participant can understand.

See also BRA-29 for additional information on participant rights to their genetic data.

Biobanks

As delineated in LawNo14.874, human biological material stored in a biobank or biorepository belongs to the research participant, provided that its custody is under institutional responsibility. The management of stored human biological material will be the responsibility of the institution to which it is linked, in the case of storage in a biobank; or the investigator coordinating the research, in the case of storage in a biorepository. At the end of the validity of the research project, the human biological material may remain stored, if in compliance with current and relevant legislation and ethical and regulatory standards; be transferred to another biorepository or biobank; or, be discarded.

ResNo441 and the G-ClinProtocols-FAQs, in turn, state that the ICF for the collection, deposit, storage, and use of human biological materials in biobanks must include the following:

A reference to the data types that may be obtained from the participant’s stored biological material for future research
An express guarantee of the participant’s right to access the biological material information including who to contact, knowledge of the results obtained and implications of findings when the biological material is used, and the provision of genetic counseling, when applicable
An explicit statement of the participant’s wishes regarding the cession of rights to the stored material to successors, or others appointed by him, in case of death or disabling condition
A statement informing the participant that the biological information provided, collected, and obtained from the current research may be used in future research
A reference to the participant’s authorization to dispose of the remainder of the material and the situations in which it is possible
As delineated in OrdNo2201 and ResNo441, the participant or legal representative/guardian may withdraw consent at any time for care and use of biological material stored in a biorepository or biobank without any negative consequences. The G-ClinProtocols-FAQs further indicates that the participant or legal representative/guardian may also withdraw consent specifically for genetic data stored in a storage bank without any negative impact. The withdrawal is valid from the date that the decision is communicated. The withdrawal must also be formalized in a document signed by the participant or legal representative/guardian. In addition, the transfer of human biological material to be stored at a biorepository or a biobank, or another institution, must be communicated to the participant. If it is not possible to communicate with the participant or legal representative/guardian, a justification must be submitted to the CEP/CONEP System, per ResNo441. See also CLNo172 for additional guidance on classifying protocol thematic areas that require CONEP review (e.g., including protocols on the constitution and operation of biobanks for research purposes); CLNo34 for guidance on processing biobank development protocols electronically; and CLNo26 for information on submitting research protocols with human bodies and/or anatomical parts, and; CLNo23 for instructions on standardizing consent and electronic assent for research participants and biobanks.

Please refer to OrdNo2201, ResNo441, and the G-ClinProtocols-FAQs, for detailed requirements and issues associated with storing human biological materials in a biorepository or a biobank. See also ResNo836 for informed consent requirements pertaining to human cell collection and other procedures conducted by cell processing centers.

(See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent).

Requirements
(Legislation) Constitutional Amendment No. 115 of February 10, 2022 (C-AmndtNo115 - Portuguese) (February 10, 2022)
National Congress
(Legislation) General Law on the Protection of Personal Data (Law No. 13.709) (LGPD – Portuguese) (English-LGPD - Official Translation) (Effective August 15, 2020)
Federative Republic of Brazil
(Legislation) Law No. 10.742 of October 6, 2003 (LawNo10.742 - Portuguese) (Effective October 7, 2003)
Federative Republic of Brazil
(Legislation) Law No. 14,874, of May 28, 2024 (LawNo14.874 - Portuguese) (Effective August 27, 2024)
Federative Republic of Brazil
(Legislation) Law No. 6,437, of August 20, 1977 (LawNo6.437 - Portuguese) (Effective August 24, 1977)
Federative Republic of Brazil
(Legislation) Law No. 6.360 of September 23, 1976 (LawNo6.360 - Portuguese) (Effective December 28, 1976)
Federative Republic of Brazil
(Legislation) Law No. 8,069, of July 13, 1990 (LawNo8.069 – Portuguese) (Effective October 14, 1990)
Federative Republic of Brazil
(Legislation) Law No. 9.782 of January 26, 1999 (LawNo9.782 - Portuguese) (Effective January 27, 1999)
Federative Republic of Brazil
(Regulation) CD/ANPD Resolution No. 15, of April 24, 2024 (CD-ANPD-No15 – Portuguese) (Effective April 26, 2024)
National Data Protection Authority (ANPD), Ministry of Justice and Public Security
(Regulation) CD/ANPD Resolution No. 18, Of July 16, 2024 (CD-ANPD-No18 - Portuguese) (Effective July 17, 2024)
National Data Protection Authority (ANPD), Ministry of Justice and Public Security
(Regulation) CD/ANPD Resolution No. 19, of August 23, 2024 (CD-ANPD-No19 - Portuguese) (English-CD-ANPD-No19 - Official Translation) (Amended August 18, 2025)
National Data Protection Authority (ANPD), Ministry of Justice and Public Security
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 292 of July 8, 1999 (ResNo292 - Portuguese) (July 8, 1999)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 304 of August 9, 2000 (ResNo304 - Portuguese) (English-ResNo304 – Official Translation) (August 9, 2000)
National Health Council (CNS), Minister of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 340 of July 8, 2004 (ResNo340 - Portuguese) (July 8, 2004)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 346 of January 13, 2005 (ResNo346 - Portuguese) (January 13, 2005)
National Health Council (CNS), Minister of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 441 of May 12, 2011 (ResNo441 - Portuguese) (May 12, 2011)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 446 of August 11, 2011 (ResNo446 - Portuguese) (Effective August 29, 2011)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 466 of December 12, 2012 (ResNo466 - Portuguese) (English-ResNo466 – Google Translation) (Effective June 13, 2013)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 506 of February 3, 2016 (CNSResNo506 - Portuguese) (Effective March 23, 2016)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 563 of November 10, 2017 (ResNo563 - Portuguese) (November 10, 2017)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 580 of March 22, 2018 (ResNo580 - Portuguese) (Effective July 16, 2018)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 674, of May 6, 2022 (ResNo674 - Portuguese) (English-ResNo674 - Portuguese) (May 6, 2022)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 706 of February 16, 2023 (ResNo706 – Portuguese) (English-ResNo706 – Portuguese) (Effective August 23, 2023)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 738 of February 1, 2024 (ResNo738 – Portuguese) (Effective January 21, 2025)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 251 of August 7, 1997 (ResNo251 - Portuguese) (August 7, 1997)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) CNS Resolution No. 647 of October 12, 2020 (ResNo647 - Portuguese) (English-ResNo647 - Google Translation) (Effective June 24, 2021)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Interministerial Ordinance No. 45, of January 27, 2017 (OrdNo45 - Portuguese) (Effective February 9, 2017)
Ministry of Finance
(Regulation) Ordinance No. 1,184, of October 17, 2023 (OrdNo1.184 – Portuguese) (Effective October 19, 2023)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Ordinance No. 2201 of September 14, 2011 (OrdNo2201 - Portuguese) (Effective September 15, 2011)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Ordinance No. 344, of May 12, 1998 (OrdNo344 – Portuguese) (Effective May 15, 1998)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Ordinance No. 552 of March 9, 2007 (OrdNo552 - Portuguese) (March 9, 2007)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Regulatory Instruction No. 122 of March 9, 2022 (RegNo122 – Portuguese) (Effective April 1, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Regulatory Instruction No. 136 of March 30, 2022 (RegNo136 - Portuguese) (Effective May 2, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Regulatory Instruction No. 289 of March 20, 2024 (RegNo289 – Portuguese) (Effective April 1, 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Regulatory Instruction No. 292 of May 2, 2024 (RegNo292 – Portuguese) (Effective June 3, 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Regulatory Instruction No. 338 of November 29, 2024 (RegNo338 - Portuguese) (Effective January 1, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Regulatory Instruction No. 345 of February 20, 2025 (RegNo345 - Portuguese) (Effective February 24, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 204 of December 27, 2017 (ResNo204 - Portuguese) (Effective February 26, 2018)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 205 of December 28, 2017 (ResNo205 - Portuguese) (Effective February 27, 2018)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 208 of January 5, 2018 (ResNo208 - Portuguese) (Effective January 8, 2018)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 311 of October 10, 2019 (ResNo311 - Portuguese) (Effective October 16, 2019)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 38 of August 12, 2013 (ResNo38 - Portuguese) (Effective August 13, 2013)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 504 of May 27, 2021 (ResNo504 - Portuguese) (Effective July 1, 2021)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 506 of May 27, 2021 (ResNo506 - Portuguese) (Effective July 1, 2021)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 659, of March 30, 2022 (ResNo659 - Portuguese) (Effective May 2, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 705 of June 14, 2022 (ResNo705 - Portuguese) (Effective June 20, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 74 of May 2, 2016 (ResNo74 - Portuguese) (Effective May 3, 2016)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 742 of August 10, 2022 (ResNo742 - Portuguese) (Effective July 3, 2023)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 763 of November 25, 2022 (ResNo763 - Portuguese) (Effective December 1, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 800 of June 6, 2023 (ResNo800 - Portuguese) (Effective July 3, 2023)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 81 of November 5, 2008 (ResNo81 - Portuguese) (Effective November 6, 2008)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 811, of August 18, 2023 (ResNo811 – Portuguese) (September 1, 2023)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 903 of September 6, 2024 (ResNo903 - Portuguese) (Effective September 9, 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 926, of September 20, 2024 (ResNo926 - Portuguese) (Effective September 24, 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 931, of October 9, 2024 (ResNo931 - Portuguese) (Effective October 14, 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 942, of November 18, 2024 (ResNo942 - Portuguese) (Effective November 19, 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board - RDC No. 947 of December 12, 2024 (ResNo947 - Portuguese) (Effective March 13, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board – RDC No. 172 of September 8, 2017 (ResNo172 - Portuguese) (Effective October 12, 2017)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board – RDC No. 585 of December 10, 2021 (ResNo585 - Portuguese) (Effective December 20, 2021)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board – RDC No. 613 of March 9, 2022 (ResNo613 - Portuguese) (Effective April 1, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board – RDC No. 658 of March 30, 2022 (ResNo658 - Portuguese) (Effective May 2, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board – RDC No. 836 of December 13, 2023 (ResNo836 – Portuguese) (Effective December 18, 2023)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board – RDC No. 857 of May 6, 2024 (ResNo857 - Portuguese) (Effective June 3, 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board – RDC No. 945, of November 29, 2024 (ResNo945 - Portuguese) (Effective January 1, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Resolution of the Collegiate Board RDC No.741 of August 10, 2022 (ResNo741 – Portuguese) (Effective September 1, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Anvisa Manual for Importing Medicines and Related Products (G-ImprtMeds - Portuguese) (English-G-ImprtMeds – Google Translation) (Version 1.1) (September 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Inspection Guide for Clinical Trials with Drugs and Biological Products - Inspection in Clinical Trial Centers (GuideNo35-2020 - Portuguese) (English-GuideNo35-2020 – Google Translation) (Version 2) (Effective January 27, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Inspection Guide for Clinical Trials with Drugs and Biological Products - Inspection of Sponsors and Clinical Research Representative Organization (ORPC) (GuideNo36-2020 - Portuguese) (English-GuideNo36-2020 – Google Translation) (Version 2) (Effective January 27, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Guidance Manual: Frequent Pending Issues in Clinical Research Protocols (Version 1.0) (G-ClinProtocols-FAQs - Portuguese) (English-G-ClinProtocols-FAQs – Google Translation) (2015)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Guidance) Guideline: Performance of the Person Responsible for the Processing of Personal Data (G-CD-ANPD-No18 - Portuguese) (English-G-CD-ANPD-No18 – Google Translation) (December 2024)
National Data Protection Authority (ANPD), Ministry of Justice and Public Security
(Guidance) Health Surveillance Manual on the Transportation of Human Biological Material for Clinical Diagnostic Purposes (G-BiolMatTransprt - Portuguese) (English-G-BiolMatTransprt – Google Translation) (2015)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Manual for Reporting Adverse Events and Safety Monitoring in Clinical Trials (AESafetyManual - Portuguese) (English-AESafetyManual – Google Translation) (1st Edition) (2016)
General Management of Medicines (GGMED), Coordination of Clinical Research in Medications and Biological Products (COPEC), National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)
(Guidance) Manual for Reporting Suspected Serious and Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSARs) and Safety Monitoring in Clinical Trials (G-SUSARs - Portuguese) (English-G-SUSARs – Google Translation) (2nd Edition) (2025)
Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (COPEC) Second Board of Directors, National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)
(Guidance) Manual for Submission of Clinical Drug Development Dossier (DDCM) and Specific Clinical Trial Dossier (DEEC) (G-DDCMManual - Portuguese) (English-G-DDCMManual - Google Translation) (4th Edition) (2025)
General Management of Medicines (GGMED), Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (COPEC), National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)
(Guidance) Manual for Submission of Modifications, Amendments, Suspensions and Cancellations (G-DDCMAmdmts - Portuguese) (English-G-DDCMAmdmts – Google Translation) (5th Edition) (April 26, 2021)
General Management of Medicines (GGMED), Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (COPEC), National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)
(Guidance) Manual for Submission of Monitoring Reports and Clinical Trial Start and End Forms (G-CTReptsManual - Portuguese) (English-G-CTReptsManual – Unofficial Translation) (1st Edition) (2016)
General Management of Medicines (GGMED), Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (COPEC), National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)
(Guidance) Manual: Petition for Import License through LPCO (G-LPCOImprtPetition - Portuguese) (English-G-LPCOImprtPetition - Google Translation) (Version 2.17) (Last Updated February 12, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Operating Manual for Research Ethics Committees (OMREC - Portuguese) (English-OMREC – Google Translation) (4th Edition revised and updated) (2008)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Guidance) Operational Guidelines for the Establishment and Operation of Data and Safety Monitoring Committees (G-DSMB-BRA - Portuguese) (English-G-DSMB-BRA – Official Translation) (2008)
Ministry of Health; World Health Organization (WHO)
(Guidance) Operational Standard No. 001/2013 - CEP/CONEP System Organization, Functions and Procedures (OSNo001 - Portuguese) (English-OSNo001 – Google Translation) (September 30, 2013)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Processing of Personal Data for Academic Purposes and for Carrying Out Studies and Research (G-PDP-Acad – Portuguese) (English-G-PDP-Acad – Google Translation) (June 2023)
National Data Protection Authority
(Guidance) Quality Data Submission Manual for Investigational Products Used in Clinical Trials - Synthetic and Semisynthetic Medicines (G-SynthDrugProdManual - Portuguese) (English-G-SynthDrugProdManual – Google Translation) (3rd Edition) (2019)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Quality Data Submission Manual for Investigational Products Used in Clinical Trials – Biological Products (G-BiolProdManual - Portuguese) (English-G-BiolProdManual – Google Translation) (3rd Edition) (2019)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Standard Procedures No. 006 - Evaluation of Research Ethics Committees (SP006REC - Portuguese) (English-SP006REC – Google Translation) (October 1, 2009)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 038/2014 - Processing of Amendments in the CEP/CONEP System (CLNo038 - Portuguese) (March 12, 2014)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 040/2015 - Investigator Brochure Processing via Plataforma Brasil (PB) (CLNo040 - Portuguese) (English-CLNo040 – Google Translation) (March 27, 2015)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 041/2015 - Guidance on CNS Resolution 340 of 2004 (Item V.1.a) (CLNo041 - Portuguese) (March 27, 2015)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 046/2015 - Research Center Inclusion/Exclusion Requirements When Submitting Responses to Pending CONEP Issues (CLNo046 - Portuguese) (April 15, 2015)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 062/2011 - Documents Required for Center Inclusion; Center Exclusion; Change of Coordinating Center and Investigator; Transfer of Study Site; Change of Investigator; Cancellation; Suspension and Closure of the Study (CLNo062 - Portuguese) (July 19, 2011)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 1/2021 - Guidelines for Research Procedures with Any Step in a Virtual Environment (CLNo1-2021 - Portuguese) (English-CLNo1-2021 – Google Translation) (March 3, 2021)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), Executive Secretariat of the National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 1/2022 - Use of an Electronic Mail System (E-mail) to Send Administrative Documents from Research Ethics Committees (CEP) (CLNo1-2022 - Portuguese) (English-CLNo1-2022 – Google Translation) (February 7, 2022)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), Executive Secretariat of the National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 10/2024: Guidance on the Procedures to be Adopted in the Event of a Strike or Institutional Recess (CLNo10 – Portuguese) (English-CLNo10 – Google Translation) (April 9, 2024)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 11 – Guidelines Related to the Process of Obtaining Consent from Research Participants Under 18 Years of Age and People with a Permanent or Temporary “Lack of Autonomy” to Consent (CLNo11 – Portuguese) (English-CLNo11 – Google Translation) (July 26, 2023)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 13/2020 - CONEP Requirements for the Processing of Adverse Events in the CEP/CONEP System (CLNo13 - Portuguese) (English-CLNo13 – Google Translation) (June 2, 2020)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), Executive Secretariat of the National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 17/2017 - Informed Consent Form Update Requirements (CLNo17 - Portuguese) (July 26, 2017)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 172/2017 - Clarifications Regarding the Selection of Thematic Area (CLNo172 - Portuguese) (April 20, 2017)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 183/2017 – Linking the Investigator and Institutions to the CEP (CLNo183 – Portuguese) (May 8, 2017)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 23/2022 - Standardization of the Use of Electronic Consent and Assent for Research and Biobank Participants (CLNo23 – Portuguese) (English-CLNo23 – Google Translation) (October 17, 2022)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), Executive Secretariat of the National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 24/2022 – General Guidelines for Conducting Clinical Trials (CLNo24 – Portuguese) (October 17, 2022)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), Executive Secretariat of the National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 25/2022 – Conducting CEP/CONEP System Meetings in a Virtual Environment (CLNo25 – Portuguese) (English-CLNo25 – Google Translation) (October 17, 2022)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), Executive Secretariat of the National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 26/2022 – Guidelines for Studies with Human Bodies or Anatomical Parts (CLNo26 – Portuguese) (December 1, 2022)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), Executive Secretariat of the National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 29 – Guidelines for Forwarding Appeals to the CEP/CONEP System Instances (CLNo29 – Portuguese) (English-CLNo29 – Google Translation) (December 22, 2023)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 34/2021 – New Guidelines for Processing Biobank Development Research Protocols through the Current Version of Plataforma Brasil (CLNo34 – Portuguese) (English-CLNo34 – Google Translation) (December 9, 2021)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), Executive Secretariat of the National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 39/2011 - Use of Medical Records Data for Research Purposes (CLNo039 - Portuguese) (September 30, 2011)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No. 51/2017 - Additional Clarifications on ICF Text (CLNo51 - Portuguese) (September 28, 2017)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Circular Letter No.008/2011 - Form to Submit Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) to CONEP (CLNo008 - Portuguese) (June 22, 2011)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Clarification Note on Circular Letter No. 24/2022 – General Guidelines for Conducting Clinical Trials (CLNo24-Note – Portuguese) (English-CLNo24-Note – Google Translation) (October 26, 2022)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), Executive Secretariat of the National Health Council (CNS)
(Circular) Guidelines for the Implementation of Article 26 of CNS Resolution No. 674 of May 6, 2022, which Provides for the Classification of Research and the Processing of Research protocols in the CEP/CONEP System (CLNo12 – Portuguese) (English-CLNo12 – Google Translation) (July 27, 2023)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Notice) Statement of the CD/ANPD No.1 of May 22, 2023 (ANPD-No1 – Portuguese) (Effective May 24, 2023)
National Data Protection Authority (ANPD), Ministry of Justice and Public Security
Additional Resources
(Article) ANVISA’s Personal Data Protection Policy is Released (BRA-77 – Portuguese) (English-BRA-77 – Official Translation) (October 30, 2023)
Monteiro, Felipe De Arau̒jo and Mezher, Verginelli Giovanna; Kaznar Leonardos
(Article) ANPD Approves Data Breach Notifying Regulation (BRA-62) (May 6, 2024)
Manzueto, Cristiane; Leal, Rodrigo; Allavato, Ana Leticia; Semeraro, Diego; Tauil & Chequer Advogados
(Article) ANPD Approves the Security Incident Reporting Regulation (BRA-61 - Portuguese) (April 29, 2024)
KLA
(Article) ANPD Launches Guide on the Role of the Person in Charge (BRA-119 - Portuguese) (Last Updated December 19, 2024)
National Data Protection Authority (ANPD), Ministry of Justice and Public Security
(Article) ANPD Publishes Resolution on the Role of the Person Responsible for Processing Personal Data (BRA-116 - Portuguese) (July 17, 2024)
Mattos Filho
(Article) Anvisa Informs about Changes in Administrative Procedures for Imports (BRA-109 - Portuguese) (July 3, 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Article) ANVISA is Approved for Pharmaceutical Inspection Cooperation Scheme - PIC/S (BRA-55 - Portuguese) (Last Updated November 3, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Article) ANVISA Updates Import Authorization Request Procedure with Mandatory Pre-Shipment (BRA-57 - Portuguese) (Last Updated October 11, 2023)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Article) ANVISA will Use Analysis from Equivalent Foreign Authorities for the GMP Inspection and Certification Process (BRA-64 - Portuguese) (Last Updated May 3, 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Article) Brazil’s Regulatory Environment Offers Positive Changes for Clinical Trials (BRA-2) (June 2018)
Fagundes, P., Dresel, P., and Miller, A.; Regulatory Focus
(Article) Clinical Trials: New Workflow for Transferring Responsibility (BRA-96 - Portuguese) (Last Updated November 1, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Article) DDCM Petition Procedure Changed (BRA-58 - Portuguese) (Last Updated June 3, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Article) Do you Want to Know if a Clinical Trial is Authorized by ANVISA? (BRA-32 - Portuguese) (June 13, 2023)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Article) Evolution of DDCM Electronic Petitioning: Check It Out (BRA-75 - Portuguese) (Last Updated February 26, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Article) Improved Electronic Petition System (BRA-14 - Portuguese) (Last Updated November 3, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Article) New Legal Framework for Clinical Research with Human Subjects Approved in Brazil (BRA-117 - Portuguese) (May 29, 2024)
Mattos Filho
(Article) The New Brazilian General Data Protection Law - A Detailed Analysis (BRA-76) (August 15, 2018)
Monteiro, Renato Leite; IAPP
(Article) Validity of the ICH E6(R2) Guide (BRA-30 - Portuguese) (Last Updated December 4, 2020)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Document) Annual Activity Report 2023 - Coordination of Clinical Research on Medicines and Biological Products - COPEC (BRA-60 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-60 – Google Translation) (7th Edition) (February 8, 2024)
Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (COPEC) Second Board of Directors, National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)
(Document) Guidance on Scheduling Meetings with COPEC (BRA-19 - Portuguese) (Last Updated December 10, 2020)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Document) Instruction Manual for Using the Authorized Clinical Trials Consultation System (BRA-129 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-129 – Google Translation) (Version 1.0) (June 12, 2023)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (BRA-63) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) New Procedure for Petitioning DDCM Documents (BRA-59 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-59 – Google Translation) (Version 07) (March 2020)
General Management of Medicines (GGMED), Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (COPEC), National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)
(Document) OECD Principles of Good Laboratory Practice (GLPs) (as revised in 1997) (BRA-15) (1998)
Environment Directorate, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(Document) Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S) Brochure (BRA-100) (September 2023)
Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S)
(Document) Plataforma Brasil - Investigator's Manual (BRA-91 - Portuguese) (Version 3.8) (Last Updated August 8, 2023)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Document) Research Ethics: Note on CNS Resolution No. 674/2022 - CEP/CONEP System (BRA-4 - Portuguese) (May 21, 2022)
National Association of Graduate Studies and Research in Education (Anped)
(Document) Research Participants’ Rights Booklet (BRA-29 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-29 – Google Translation) (Version 1.0) (2020)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Document) Roadmap for Preparing Reports on Biobanks for Research Purposes (BRA-97 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-97 – Google Translation) (Version 02) (February 2022)
National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP), National Health Council (CNS)
(Document) Solicita User Manual (BRA-47 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-47 – Google Translation) (Version 4.4) (Last Updated April 9, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Document) Technical Note 09/2015 - Clarifications on Relative Bioavailability Studies to Show Pharmacokinetic Interaction for Purposes of Registration of Fixed-Dose Combinations or Consent to Clinical Drug Development Dossier (DDCM) (BRA-6 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-6 – Google Translation) (September 3, 2015)
Coordination of Therapeutic Equivalence (CETER), Coordination of Clinical Research in Drugs and Biological Products (COPEC), General Management of Medicines (GGMED), Superintendence of Drugs and Biological Products (SUMED), National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)
(Document) Technical Note 118/2016 - Clarifications on Comparative Pharmacokinetic Studies of Biological Products (BRA-7 - Portuguese) (April 15, 2016)
Coordination of Therapeutic Equivalence (CETER), Coordination of Clinical Research in Drugs and Biological Products (COPEC), General Management of Medicines (GGMED), National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)
(Document) Technical Note 12/2021 - Guidance for Scheduling Hearings with the Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (COPEC) (BRA-90 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-90 – Google Translation) (May 21, 2021)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Document) Technical Note No. 01/2022: Guidelines on Completing the Clinical Trial Submission Form (FAEC) Regarding the Expiration Date of Medicines and Products to be Imported for Conducting Clinical Trials in Brazil, Pursuant to RDC No. 9/2015 (BRA-95 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-95 – Google Translation) (January 28, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Document) Technical Note No. 17/2024: Guidelines for Submitting Optimized Analysis Procedure Requests Based on Regulatory Trust (Reliance) for DDCM Petitions and DEEC Investigational Product Modifications and Clinical Protocol Amendments, Under the Terms of RDC No. 945/2024 and IN No. 338/2024 (BRA-122 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-122 - Google Translation) (January 28, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Document) The Use of the WHO-UMC System for Standardised Case Causality Assessment (BRA-31) (June 5, 2013)
The Uppsala Monitoring Centre (UMC), World Health Organization (WHO)
(Document) VigiMed Company User Manual - Clinical Research (BRA-130 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-130 – Google Translation) (2nd Edition) (February 2025)
Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (COPEC) Second Board of Directors, National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)
(Document) VigiMed: Adverse Drug Event Reporting System - Questions and Answers (BRA-85 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-85 – Google Translation) (Version 1.0) (July 2019)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(International Guidance) Guidance on Regulations for the Transport of Infectious Substances 2019-2020 (WHO/WHE/CPI/2019.20) (BRA-54) (Effective January 1, 2019)
World Health Organization
(International Guidance) ICH Guideline E2B (R3) on Electronic Transmission of Individual Case Safety Reports (ICSRs) - Data Elements and Message Specification - Implementation Guide (BRA-88) (Step 5 Version) (July 2013)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Guideline Addendum to ICH E11: Clinical Investigation of Medicinal Products in the Pediatric Population E11 (R1) (BRA-74) (Final Version) (August 18, 2017)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Guideline: Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) (BRA-121) (Final Version) (Adopted January 6, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Guideline: The Common Technical Document for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (M4) (BRA-133) (Step 5 Versions) (Modules range from 2002-2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (BRA-66) (Step 4 Version) (October 27, 1994)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Development Safety Update Report (E2F) (BRA-72) (Step 4 Version) (August 17, 2010)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Good Manufacturing Practice Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (Q7) (BRA-112) (Step 4 Version) (November 10, 2000)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (BRA-27) (Step 4 Version) (November 30, 1995)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (BRA-28) (Portuguese-BRA-28 - Official Translation) (Step 5 Version) (Implemented November 1, 2019)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with Fiocruz (February 2023) (BRA-9)
(Webpage) Adverse Event Reporting (BRA-37 - Portuguese) (Last Updated March 19, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) ANVISA - Contact Us (BRA-68 - Portuguese) (Last Updated July 30, 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) ANVISA - Who's Who (BRA-39 - Portuguese) (Last Updated September 29, 2020)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) ANVISA – Telephone (BRA-135 - Portuguese) (Last Updated July 30, 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) ANVISA Consultation System (BRA-44 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Brazil Platform (BRA-93 - Portuguese) (Last Updated November 23, 2020)
Ministry of Education
(Webpage) Brazilian Clinical Trials Registry (ReBEC) - FAQs (BRA-46) (Current as of August 23, 2024)
Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Health (DECIT/MS); Institute of Communication and Information Science and Technology in Health (Icict/Fiocruz); Pan American Health Organization (PAHO); Latin American and Caribbean Center on Health Sciences (Bireme)
(Webpage) Brazilian Clinical Trials Registry (ReBEC) (BRA-45) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Health (DECIT/MS); Institute of Communication and Information Science and Technology in Health (Icict/Fiocruz); Pan American Health Organization (PAHO); Latin American and Caribbean Center on Health Sciences (Bireme)
(Webpage) Company Registration (BRA-105 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (COPEC) (BRA-18 - Portuguese) (Last Updated November 21, 2022)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Country Profile: Brazil (BRA-81) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) Electronic Petition for Import (PEI) (BRA-108 - Portuguese) (Last Updated June 6, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Electronic Petitioning (BRA-38 - Portuguese) (Last Updated January 12, 2023)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Federal Revenue Collection Guide (BRA-51 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
Ministry of Economy
(Webpage) Fees - General Information (BRA-69 - Portuguese) (Last Updated March 30, 2023)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) General Management of Medicines (GGMED) (BRA-12 - Portuguese) (Last Updated January 21, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Health Surveillance: Contacts for ANVISA and State Health Surveillance Agencies and their Respective Capitals (BRA-132 - Portuguese) (Last Updated June 11, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) ICH Guideline Implementation (BRA-73) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) ICH Members & Observers (BRA-65) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) Integrated Foreign Trade System (Siscomex) (BRA-106 - Portuguese) (Last Updated June 6, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) (BRA-52) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
World Health Organization
(Webpage) International Data Transfer (BRA-118 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
National Data Protection Authority (ANPD), Ministry of Justice and Public Security
(Webpage) Issue DARF for Payment of Federal Taxes (BRA-111 - Portuguese) (Last Updated May 16, 2025)
Federal Revenue Service, Government of Brazil
(Webpage) National Health Council - About the Council (BRA-49 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) National Health Council - Plataforma Brazil (BRA-33 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) National Register of Legal Entities (CNPJ) (BRA-107 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
Ministry of Finance
(Webpage) National Research Ethics Commission (CONEP) (BRA-50 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
National Health Council (CNS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) PagTesouro – Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) (BRA-115 - Portuguese) (Last Updated January 19, 2021)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) PagTesouro (BRA-114 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
National Treasury
(Webpage) Payment Method (BRA-43 - Portuguese) (Last Updated September 28, 2023)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Plataforma Brazil Login (BRA-34 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Prioritization of Drug Analysis (BRA-82 - Portuguese) (Last Updated February 20, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Protocol Documents - General Information (BRA-42 - Portuguese) (Last Updated March 24, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Registration of New and Innovative Medicines (BRA-40 - Portuguese) (Last Updated January 31, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Request Approval for Clinical Development Dossier for Advanced Therapies (DDCTA) (BRA-134 - Portuguese) (Last Updated December 16, 2024)
Ministry of Health
(Webpage) SISCOMEX Single Foreign Trade Portal (BRA-80 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
Siscomex, Government of Brazil
(Webpage) Solicita Electronic Petition Request System Login (BRA-56 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Unified Health System (SUS) (BRA-53 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Webpage) VigiMed (BRA-83 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
Forms
(Form) Clinical Trial Start Date Form in Brazil (BRA-25 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-25 – Google Translation) (Version 3.0) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Form) Clinical Trial Submission Form (FAEC) (BRA-22 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-22 – Google Translation) (Version 6.0) (February 24, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Form) End of Clinical Trial Notification Form in Brazil (BRA-24 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-24 – Google Translation) (Version 3.0) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Form) Form for Declaration of Compliance with the Requirements for the Admissibility of the Optimized Analysis Procedure by Regulatory Trust (Reliance) (Version 2) (BRA-124 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-124 – Google Translation) (March 19, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Form) Form for Registration/Change of Registration - VigiMed (BRA-131 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-131 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Coordination of Clinical Research in Medicines and Biological Products (COPEC), National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA)
(Form) Investigational Drug Development Plan (PDME) (BRA-128 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-128 – Google Translation) (Version 3) (December 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Form) Online Adverse Event Notification Form for Advanced Therapy Products (BRA-101 - Portuguese) (Current as of June 27, 2025)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Form) Petition Form for Approval in the Clinical Drug Development (DDCM) Dossier Process (BRA-21 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-21 – Google Translation) (Version 2) (December 19, 2024)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Form) Petition Form for Substantial Amendment to Clinical Trial Protocol (BRA-125 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-125 – Google Translation) (Version 2.0) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Form) Petition Form for Substantial Modification to the Investigational Product (Annex I) (BRA-127 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-127 – Google Translation) (Version 2.0) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
(Form) Sponsor Statement of Responsibility and Commitment Form for Expanded Access, Compassionate Use, or Post-Study Drug Delivery Programs - (Annex VI of Resolution No. 38) (BRA-126 - Portuguese) (English-BRA-126 – Google Translation) (2013)
National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), Ministry of Health
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 


Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Canada
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
This message was reviewed on December 29, 2025
Information Not Yet Incorporated Into Country Profile:

Planned Implementation of ICH E6(R3) Guideline

On October 17, 2025, Health Canada announced the planned implementation of the ICH Harmonised Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3), which will go into effect on April 1, 2026. Stakeholders should take steps to ensure full compliance by that date. For more details, see the Health Canada notice.

Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 19, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Health Canada’s implementation of the ICH Harmonised Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) will go into effect on April 1, 2026, and stakeholders are expected to be in full compliance by that date. See the Health Canada notice for more details. 

Health Canada

As per the CanadaFDA, the CanadaFDR, and the G-CanadaCTApps, Health Canada (HC) is the competent authority responsible for clinical trial approvals, oversight, and inspections in Canada. The G-CanadaCTApps states that the HC grants permission for clinical trials to be conducted in the country, and regulates the sale and importation of drugs for use in clinical trials in accordance with the CanadaFDR provisions.

As per CAN-29, HC is one (1) of five (5) federal agencies within Canada’s “Health Portfolio” overseen by the Minister of Health. Per CAN-31, HC assesses clinical trial protocols to evaluate participant protection and safety; reviews drug quality; assures institutional ethics committee review; verifies principal investigator qualifications; and monitors and reviews adverse drug reactions. As delineated in CAN-23, HC’s Health Products and Food Branch (HPFB) is the national authority that regulates, evaluates, and monitors therapeutic and diagnostic product safety, efficacy, and quality, and reviews the information submitted in the clinical trial application. Per CanadaFDA, if the Minister believes on reasonable grounds that the use of a therapeutic product, other than the intended use, may present a risk of injury to health, the Minister may, by order, establish rules in respect of the importation, sale, conditions of sale, advertising, manufacture, preparation, preservation, packaging, labelling, storage, or testing of the therapeutic product for the purpose of preventing, managing, or controlling the risk of injury to health.

Per CAN-16, HPFB’s activities are carried out by nine (9) Directorates, including the Pharmaceutical Drugs Directorate (PDD) and the Biologic and Radiopharmaceutical Drugs Directorate (BRDD). Per CAN-18, PDD regulates pharmaceutical drugs for human use. Specifically, PPD:

Reviews scientific information to assess the safety, efficacy, and quality of a prescription drug
Assesses the potential benefits and risks of a prescription drug
Reviews clinical trial applications for prescription drugs to ensure that the studies are well-designed and that participants will not be exposed to undue risk
Monitors the evolving safety of drugs in development through the review of adverse reaction reports
Makes non-marketed drugs available to health professionals for patients when conventional therapies have failed, are not suitable, or are not available
Provides Canadians with science-based medical information they need to make informed choices
CAN-17 indicates that the BRDD regulates biological drugs, radiopharmaceuticals, and cells, tissues, and organs for human use, including clinical trials.

In addition, the G-CanadaCTApps indicates that the PDD’s Office of Clinical Trials (OCT) and the BRDD’s Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA), among others, are directly involved with the clinical trial review and approval process for pharmaceutical, biological, and radiopharmaceutical drugs. CAN-18 states that the PDD Director General's Office oversees pharmaceutical clinical trials. Per the G-MDSA, the Therapeutic Products Classification Committee (TPCC) may be consulted when it is not clear whether a product should be classified as a drug or device. The committee makes recommendations on the classification of a product as either a drug, medical device, or combination product. When appropriate, other regulatory areas of HC may be asked to participate in the committee's discussion.

As per CAN-41, Health Canada has established a regulatory innovation agenda, which aims to provide more regulatory flexibility to support innovative research and health product development. For more details, see CAN-41.

Other Considerations

Per CAN-10, Canada is an official member of the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). Per CAN-50, HC-implemented ICH guidelines take precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent. Per CAN-50, Canada has implemented the ICH’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52). Also see CAN-50 for details on all the ICH guidelines implemented by HC. For any questions or comments, contact HC’s ICH Coordinator via email at ich@hc-sc.gc.ca.

Contact Information

According to the G-DrugApp, G-MDSA, and CAN-18, Health Canada PDD contact information is as follows (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Office of Clinical Trials
Pharmaceutical Drugs Directorate
Health Products and Food Branch
Health Canada
5th Fl, Holland Cross, Tower B
1600 Scott St
Address Locator: 3105A
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K1A 0K9

Phone (General Enquiries): 613-957-0368
Fax (General Enquiries): 613-952-7756
General Inquiries: oct.enquiries-requetes.bec@hc-sc.gc.ca
Pre-CTA Meeting Requests: oct.pre.cta-dec.bec@hc-sc.gc.ca

Per G-MDSA, the following is the contact information for biologic clinical trials:

Office of Regulatory Affairs
Biologic and Radiopharmaceutical Drugs Directorate
Health Products and Food Branch
Health Canada
100 Eglantine Dr
Tunney’s Pasture
Address Locator: 0601C 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K1A 0K9

Phone: 613-957-1722
E-mail: brdd.ora@hc-sc.gc.ca 

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the CanadaFDA, Health Canada (HC) reviews, evaluates, and approves applications for clinical trials using authorized therapeutic products. HC also approves the sale or importation of drugs for use in clinical trials. (See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information on importation.) As delineated in the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, institutional ethics committee (EC) review is required for each clinical trial site and may occur in parallel with HC’s clinical trial application (CTA) review and approval. For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100. See CAN-23 and CAN-19 for background information on HC’s scope of assessment.

Per the CanadaFDA, a “therapeutic product” is defined as a drug or device, or any combination of drugs and devices, but does not include natural health products; and “therapeutic product authorization” refers to a license that is approved for the import, sale, advertisement, manufacture, preparation, preservation, packaging, labeling, storage, or testing of a therapeutic product. As per the G-CanadaCTApps, a drug is defined as a pharmaceutical, biologic, gene therapy, blood product, vaccine, and radiopharmaceutical for human use that is to be tested in a clinical trial. HC’s scope of assessment includes clinical trials (Phases I - III) using:

Drugs not authorized for sale in Canada in development and in comparative bioavailability studies
Marketed drugs where the proposed use of the drug for one (1) of the following is different: indication(s) and clinical use; target patient population(s); route(s) of administration; or dosage regimen(s)
Clinical Trial Review Process

As set forth in the G-CanadaCTApps and CAN-23, HC’s Health Products and Food Branch (HPFB) coordinates the CTA approval process. The G-CanadaCTApps and CAN-23 state that prior to initiating the trial, the sponsor must file a CTA to the appropriate HPFB Directorate. CTAs involving pharmaceutical drugs should be sent to the Pharmaceutical Drugs Directorate (PDD), and CTAs involving biologics and/or radiopharmaceuticals should be sent to the Biologic and Radiopharmaceutical Drugs Directorate (BRDD).

The G-CanadaCTApps indicates that upon receipt of a CTA, the HPFB Directorate (PDD/BRDD) screens the application package for completeness. If deficiencies are found, the Directorate sends the sponsor a Request for Clarification or a Screening Rejection Letter. If the Directorate finds the application complete, an acknowledgement letter is issued to indicate the 30-day default review period commenced on the date of receipt. See CAN-23 for more information.

Per the G-CanadaCTApps, once a clinical trial is authorized, the sponsor is allowed to sell or import a drug for use in a trial, if a CTA has been filed with HC and has not received an objection within 30 days. If the clinical trial is authorized, a No Objection Letter (NOL) is issued. If the CTA is rejected, a Not Satisfactory Notice (NSN) is issued. During the review period, the Directorate may request additional information from the sponsor, who has two (2) calendar days to provide such information. Please see the G-CanadaCTApps for special requirements regarding reviews of comparative bioavailability studies and joint reviews of clinical trials covering a combination of devices, biologics, and pharmaceuticals. See the Submission Process section for detailed application submission requirements. See CAN-23 for more information.

Per the G-CanadaCTApps, soon after HC issues an NOL, it will publish the following information about the clinical trial in HC’s publicly accessible database:

Protocol number
Protocol title
Drug name
Medical condition
Study population
Authorization date
Sponsor name
HC control number
Trial start and end dates, if known
The CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps also delineate that a clinical trial application-amendment (CTA-A) is required for proposed changes to a previously authorized study when the changes to clinical trial drug supplies affect the quality or safety of the drug, or when the changes to an authorized protocol alter the risk to clinical trial participants, or both. CTA-As must be authorized by HC prior to implementation of the changes. However, if the sponsor is required to immediately implement changes because the clinical trial or the use of the clinical trial drug endangers the health of participants or other persons, the sponsor may immediately make the amendment without prior review by HC. Sponsors must notify HC of this change, provide the relevant rationale in support of the immediate implementation, and file a CTA-A that clearly identifies the change and rationale for immediate implementation of the change within 15 days after the amendment implementation date. In addition, sponsors may make the following changes immediately if it notifies HC in writing within 15 days after the date of the change: a change to the chemistry and manufacturing information that does not affect the quality or safety of the drug; or a change to the protocol that does not alter the risk to the health of a participant.

As delineated in the CanadaFDA and the G-Inspections, HC is authorized to implement an inspection strategy and to ensure compliance with CanadaFDA. The G-Inspections states that HC’s Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch (ROEB) monitors compliance, which is assessed through inspections and other compliance and enforcement activities, such as compliance verifications. Compliance verifications of clinical trials may be initiated when there are reasonable grounds to believe that non-compliance may have occurred or is occurring and that enforcement measures may be necessary (e.g., complaints received regarding specific trials, reports of adverse drug reaction(s), or reports from other regulatory authorities). The Clinical Trial Compliance Program within ROEB is responsible for clinical trial site selection for inspections in collaboration with the PDD and the BRDD. A risk-based approach is applied in the site selection process to minimize the potential health risks inherent to clinical trials involving human participants. The selection of sites for inspection is based on a variety of criteria to select sites throughout all levels of the drug assessment and regulatory approvals process.

Per the CanadaFDR, HC will suspend the authorization to sell or import a drug for clinical trial purposes if it has reasonable grounds to believe that:

The sponsor has contravened any relevant laws or regulations
Any information submitted in respect of the drug or clinical trial is false or misleading
The sponsor has failed to comply with good clinical practices
The sponsor has failed to provide information or samples as required by the regulation
See the CanadaFDR for additional details on HC’s suspension and cancellation responsibilities.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
According to CAN-33, there are no fees to submit a clinical trial application in Canada.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Overview

As indicated in the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, Canada has a decentralized process for the ethical review of clinical trial applications, and requires the sponsor to obtain institutional ethics committee (EC) approval for each participating trial site. (Note: institutional ECs are referred to as Research Ethics Boards (REBs) in Canada.) Canadian provinces may have varying requirements, and, therefore, the sponsor should consult with the applicable province(s) for more information.

Per CAN-35 and CAN-13, all proposed or ongoing research involving human participants carried out by, funded by, or otherwise under the auspices of Health Canada (HC) or the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) must obtain approval from a joint EC representing those two (2) agencies—as well as complying with the CanadaFDR and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50. This joint EC is known as the HC-PHAC REB. Further, if an institution is conducting an HC- or PHAC-funded project, the HC-PHAC REB must review and approve the research even if it has been previously reviewed and approved by another EC. See CAN-35 for details on the HC-PHAC REB’s development, responsibilities, and composition. HC’s operational policy (CAN-13) outlines policies and procedures that the joint HC-PHAC REB must follow when reviewing clinical trials.

Institutional ECs are required to comply with the provisions delineated in the CanadaFDR, the G-CanadaCTApps, and CAN-52. Note that per CAN-50, HC-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent. For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100. In addition, institutional ECs are guided by the G-TCPS2. Jointly developed by Canada’s three (3) federal research agencies: the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC), the G-TCPS2 is a policy that sets the ethical benchmark for all Canadian institutional ECs. However, only CIHR-, NSERC-, and SSHRC-funded institutions are required to comply with this guideline as a condition of funding. According to CAN-14, the CIHR, the NSERC, and the SSHRC created the Panel on Research Ethics (PRE) to promote the ethical conduct of research involving human participants. The PRE develops, interprets, and implements the G-TCPS2.

Ethics Committee Composition

As delineated in the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, institutional ECs must have at least five (5) members representing a mixed gender composition, the majority of which are Canadian citizens or permanent residents, and must include:

Two (2) members from a scientific discipline, with broad experience in the relevant research methods and areas, one (1) of whom is from a medical or dental discipline
One (1) member knowledgeable in ethics
One (1) member knowledgeable in relevant Canadian biomedical research laws
One (1) member from a nonscientific discipline
One (1) community representative
The G-TCPS2 mirrors these EC composition requirements, and also requires a Chair who is responsible for ensuring that the ethics review process conforms to the requirements of G-TCPS2. The Chair provides overall leadership for the EC and facilitates the review process based on institutional policies and procedures and the G-TCPS2. The Chair should monitor the EC’s decisions for consistency and ensure that these decisions are recorded accurately and communicated clearly to researchers in writing as soon as possible by the Chair or designate. Institutions must provide the necessary resources and adequate administrative support to enable the EC Chair to fulfill his or her responsibilities. As mentioned earlier, only CIHR-, NSERC-, and SSHRC-funded institutions are required to comply with this guidance as a condition of funding.

Also, see CAN-52 for additional guidance on ECs.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

According to CAN-52, institutional ECs must establish written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to cover the entire review process. The SOPs should include EC composition, meeting schedules, notifications, frequency of reviews, protocol deviations, reporting to the EC, and recordkeeping. Further, ECs should make decisions at announced meetings where a quorum is present. Only those members who participate in the EC review and discussion should vote, provide their opinion, or advise. For detailed EC procedures and information on other administrative processes, see CAN-52. For examples of EC SOPs, see CAN-13 for the HC-PHAC REB operational policy.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Health Canada’s implementation of the ICH Harmonised Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) will go into effect on April 1, 2026, and stakeholders are expected to be in full compliance by that date. See the Health Canada notice for more details. 

Overview

According to the CanadaFDR, the G-CanadaCTApps, the G-TCPS2, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), the primary scope of information assessed by institutional ethics committees (ECs) (called Research Ethics Boards (REBs) in Canada) relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of human research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial. ECs must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed vulnerable. (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations.) Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent.

CAN-52, which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, also states that ECs must ensure an independent, timely, and competent review of all ethical aspects of the clinical trial protocol. They must act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved by evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants, and they must verify the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards. See CAN-52 for detailed ethical review guidelines.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

As per the CanadaFDR and CAN-52, HC must approve a clinical trial application (CTA) and an institutional EC(s) must give ethical clearance prior to a sponsor initiating a clinical trial. In addition, as delineated in the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, institutional EC review for each clinical trial site may occur in parallel with HC’s CTA review and approval. Once HC completes its review, the department issues a No Objection Letter (NOL) if the CTA is approved. However, per the CanadaFDR, the G-CanadaCTApps, CAN-6, and CAN-30, HC will not authorize the sponsor to begin the clinical trial until an institutional EC approval for each participating trial site is submitted. The sponsor should use the Clinical Trial Site Information Form (CAN-6) to submit the required information. The CanadaFDR also states that the EC must review and approve any protocol amendments prior to those changes being implemented. For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100.

The G-TCPS2, which sets the ethical benchmark for all Canadian institutional ECs, requires EC review and approval of research involving living human participants and human biological materials. Further, ECs must have procedures in place to receive and respond to reports of new information, including, but not limited to, safety data, unanticipated issues, and newly discovered risks.

See TCPS2-InterpReview for the Panel on Research Ethics (PRE)’s interpretations of the G-TCPS2, including on the EC’s review of secondary use of non-identifiable information, delegated review of minimal risk studies, and ongoing review.

The G-TCPS2 lays out options, procedures, and considerations for the ethics review of multi-jurisdictional research either entirely within Canada, or in Canada and other countries. An institutional EC may approve alternative review models for research with multiple ECs and/or institutions but remains responsible for the ethics and conduct of research in its jurisdiction or under its auspices regardless of where the research is conducted. The SingleECRev provides guidance on the G-TCPS2’s single EC review model for multi-jurisdictional minimal risk, which seeks to streamline the research ethics review process where additional ethics reviews are not expected to add greater participant protections. In line with a proportionate approach to research ethics review, if research is of minimal risk and spans multiple jurisdictions, institutions that have approved the use of the single EC review model authorize the review of the research by one (1) EC. See the G-TCPS2 for more information about the various review models for multi-jurisdictional research.

Per CAN-8, an attestation must be completed by the EC that reviewed and approved the clinical trial. The completed attestation must be retained by the clinical trial sponsor for a period of 15 years. The attestation should not be submitted to HC unless requested. (See the Submission Process section for detailed submission requirements.)

The G-TCPS2 directs the researcher to submit an annual report to enable the EC to evaluate the continued ethical acceptability of the research. Per the G-CanadaCTApps, in the event that an EC terminates or suspends any prior approval or favorable opinion, it must document its views in writing, clearly identifying the trial, the documents reviewed, and the date for the termination or suspension.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Institutional ethics committees (ECs) may independently decide whether to charge fees to conduct protocol reviews. For example, an institutional EC may require industry sponsors or other for-profit organizations to pay a fee. See specific examples of institutional fee requirements in CAN-3 and CAN-1.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
There are no applicable regulations or guidance regarding the registration, auditing, and accreditation of institutional ethics committees (ECs).

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 19, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, Canada requires the sponsor to obtain clinical trial authorization from Health Canada (HC) prior to initiating the trial. The sponsor must file a clinical trial application (CTA) to the appropriate Directorate within HC’s Health Products and Food Branch (HPFB). In addition, as delineated in the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, the sponsor may submit a CTA for clinical trial authorization to the HC in parallel with its submission to an institutional ethics committee (EC) (known as a Research Ethics Board (REB) in Canada) for a favorable ethical opinion. However, per the CanadaFDR, the G-CanadaCTApps, CAN-6, and CAN-30, HC will not authorize the sponsor to begin the clinical trial until an institutional EC approval (provided in the required Clinical Trial Site Information (CTSI) form (CAN-6)) for each participating trial site is submitted. The HCNotice-CTSIForm indicates that the CTSI form improves efficiencies and supports the submission of CTAs using the electronic Common Technical Document (eCTD) format. See CAN-30 for instructions on filling out and submitting CAN-6.

CAN-19 provides a full list of HC’s forms for drug-related applications and submissions. For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100.

Regulatory Submission

Per the G-CanadaCTApps, CTAs (CAN-4) should be sent directly to the appropriate HPFB Directorate for review—the Pharmaceutical Drugs Directorate (PDD) for pharmaceutical drugs or the Biologic and Radiopharmaceutical Drugs Directorate (BRDD) for biological drugs and radiopharmaceuticals.

The G-MDSA and the G-CanadaCTApps indicate that sponsors may request a pre-submission/application meeting with the appropriate directorate within Health Canada if they have any questions or concerns prior to filing a CTA. Additional details on requesting a meeting and meeting procedures are available in the aforementioned guidance documents. According to CAN-4, the submission can be in French or English. For CTAs that use pharmacometric approaches, sponsors should consider the policy statements in G-Pharmacometrics. Pharmacometrics is the science of using quantitative analysis and modelling and simulation approaches to inform and enhance drug development and regulatory review. In addition, see the G-CTACell for guidance on preparing CTAs for use of cell therapy products in humans.

Per the CanadaFDR, an application by a sponsor for authorization to sell or import a drug for the purposes of a clinical trial must be submitted to HC, signed and dated by the sponsor’s senior medical or scientific officer in Canada and senior executive officer. The sponsor’s clinical trial attestation must be submitted with the application (CAN-4). For guidance on completing CAN-4, see the G-DrugApp.

eCTD Electronic Submission

As indicated in the G-eCTD, clinical trial applications in eCTD format are recommended, not mandatory. However, once a sponsor files a regulatory activity in eCTD format, all additional information and subsequent regulatory activities for the same dossier must be filed in eCTD format. CAN-36 explains that prior to filing the first regulatory transaction for a dossier in eCTD format, the sponsor must request a dossier ID using the online dossier ID request. Per the ElecSubms, CAN-20 is the request form for biological clinical trial dossiers and CAN-21 is for pharmaceutical clinical trial dossiers. A request for a dossier ID should be sent a maximum of eight (8) weeks prior to submitting the CTA. In addition, applicants should review the Rules-eCTD for validation rules before submission. (Note: As per ElecSubms, G-eCTD and CAN-36 are only available upon request at no-reply.ereview.non-reponse@hc-sc.gc.ca. Please ensure the text 'Request for eCTD Guidance Document' is in the subject line of the email.)

Per the G-eCTD and CAN-28, all regulatory transactions in eCTD format must be sent via the Common Electronic Submissions Gateway (CESG) (CAN-25), except for those exceeding 10 gigabytes (GB) in size. The CESG allows users to submit secure regulatory transactions electronically to HC, including CTAs. The G-eCTD and CAN-36 describe how to file CTAs and other clinical trial regulatory transactions (e.g., CTA amendments, responses to requests for information, and other in-scope activities) in eCTD format to CESG. The G-eCTD clarifies that prior to using the CESG for sending transactions, sponsors must register as a trading partner. To access and use CESG, CAN-34 instructs sponsors to follow these steps:

Register as a trading partner with the US Food & Drug Administration (FDA) at the FDA Electronic Submissions Gateway Next Generation (ESG NextGen) (CAN-51) to be able to send a regulatory transaction (Note: CAN-54 indicates that the new version of the platform, ESG NextGen, continues to support HC submissions.)
Send regulatory transactions to HC by selecting “HC” as the center on the FDA ESG system; CTAs intended for HC will be automatically redirected.
For detailed information on how to become a trading partner and send regulatory transactions, refer to CAN-54, CAN-51, and CAN-25.

As indicated in the G-eCTD, the following media formats are acceptable for eCTD transactions greater than 10 GB: Universal Serial Bus (USB) 2.0 or 3.0 drive; or portable external hard drive with USB 2.0 or 3.0 interfaces. (Contact HC at hc.ereview.sc@canada.ca for other media formats that may be acceptable at the time of filing.) A paper copy of the cover letter must accompany the media (unless otherwise indicated), and a pre-paid envelope must be provided if the media is to be returned. The complete regulatory transaction must be provided on a single drive, and the label on the drive should contain the following information:

Stakeholder Name
Brand Name
Dossier ID, which is based on the protocol number
Sequence (regulatory transaction) number
Media must be mailed to HC at the address below:

Health Canada
Finance Building
101 Tunney’s Pasture Driveway
Address Locator: 0201A1
Ottawa, Ontario
K1A 0K9

See the G-eCTD, CAN-54, CAN-34, CAN-36, CAN-25, and CAN-28 for details on registering as a trading partner for CESG transactions, how to use CESG, and submitting CTAs in eCTD format.

Non-eCTD Electronic Submission

For non-eCTD electronic submissions, G-Non-eCTD indicates that HC requires both PDF and MS-Word formats for the CTA (CAN-4). The PDF documents must be generated from electronic sources (not scanned material), except when access to an electronic source document is unavailable or where a signature is required. It is important that PDF files be properly bookmarked and hyperlinked. Documents that legally require signatures may be signed with an electronic signature, or the signature page can be printed, signed, scanned, and saved as a PDF file. The cover letter does not require a signature, but should include a printed name, phone number, and email address. All regulatory submissions should be validated prior to transmitting to HC. For validation rules, see the Rules-Non-eCTD. The ElecSubms contains a zip file of the folder structure for clinical trial non-eCTD submissions. (Note: As per ElecSubms, G-Non-eCTD is only available upon request at no-reply.ereview.non-reponse@hc-sc.gc.ca. Please ensure the text 'non eCTD Guidance Document' is in the subject line of the email.)

Per the G-Non-eCTD, CTA submissions to the appropriate Directorate within HC’s HPFB must be in one (1) of these accepted media formats:

Compact Disc-Recordable (CD-R) conforming to the Joliet specification
USB 2.0 or 3.0 drive
Digital Versatile Disc (DVD-RAM and DVD+R/-R) in Universal Disk Format (UDF) standard
All media should be labelled and contain the following information:

Stakeholder Name
Brand Name
Dossier ID (if known)
Subsequent to burning the CD/DVD or transferring data to a drive, applicants should ensure that all files can be opened, files are not corrupted, and that "Thumb.db" files are removed.

As per the G-Non-eCTD, G-MDSA, CAN-18, and CAN-17, non-eCTD CTAs involving pharmaceutical drugs should be sent to PDD, and CTAs involving biologics and/or radiopharmaceuticals should be sent to BRDD at the addresses listed below (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Office of Clinical Trials
Pharmaceutical Drugs Directorate
Health Canada
5th Floor, Holland Cross, Tower B
1600 Scott Street
Address Locator: 3105A
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K1A 0K9
General Inquiries E-mail: oct.enquiries-requetes.bec@hc-sc.gc.ca

Office of Regulatory Affairs
Biologic and Radiopharmaceutical Drugs Directorate
Health Products and Food Branch
Ground Floor, Health Canada Building 6
100 Eglantine Driveway
Tunney’s Pasture
Address Locator: 0601C
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K1A 0K9

Telephone: 613-957-1722
E-mail: brdd.ora@hc-sc.gc.ca

Per the HCNotice-CTSIForm, questions related to pharmaceutical CTSI forms should be sent to: oct.enquiries-requetes.bec@hc-sc.gc.ca and questions related to biologic CTSI forms should be sent to brdd.ora@hc-sc.gc.ca.

Per the G-Non-eCTD, if an applicant submits a non-eCTD CTA via email, they should meet the following requirements:

The maximum email size accepted by the corporate mail server is 20 megabytes. If the clinical trial submission is larger than 20 megabytes, the submission may be split and sent as separate emails (e.g., an email for Module 1, and another email for Module 2/3). The subject line of the emails should clearly link to each other (e.g., "Email 1 of 2" in the relevant subject line)
A duplicate copy must not be provided by mail
The submission should be organized in folders and the body of the email should only contain the zipped regulatory submission
Zipped files and documents contained in the email should not be password protected
The G-Non-eCTD provides additional information on emailing other clinical trial submissions, including responses to a clarification request, responses to a no objection letter, notifications, and development safety update reports.

Ethics Review Submission

As indicated in the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, all research involving human participants in Canada must be reviewed by an institutional ethics committee (EC). (Note: institutional ECs are referred to as Research Ethics Boards (REBs) in Canada.) Because the submission process at individual institutional ECs will vary, applicants should review and follow their institution’s specific requirements. Further, Canadian provinces may have varying requirements, and, therefore, the sponsor should consult with the applicable province(s) for more information. CAN-35 delineates submission requirements to the joint HC-Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)’s EC. This joint EC reviews all research involving human subjects that is carried out by HC or PHAC researchers on the premises or in collaboration with external researchers.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Health Canada’s implementation of the ICH Harmonised Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) will go into effect on April 1, 2026, and stakeholders are expected to be in full compliance by that date. See the Health Canada notice for more details. 

Regulatory Authority Requirements

As set forth in the CanadaFDR, the G-CanadaCTApps, and CAN-31, Health Canada (HC) requires the sponsor to apply for clinical trial authorization by submitting a clinical trial application (CTA) to HC. As specified in the G-CanadaCTApps and the G-QCM-PharmCTAs, the CTA should be organized into three (3) modules in Common Technical Document (CTD) format:

Module 1 - Administrative and clinical information about the proposed trial
Module 2 - Quality (Chemistry and Manufacturing) summaries about the drug product(s) to be used in the proposed trial
Module 3 - Additional supporting quality information
Per the CanadaFDR, the clinical trial application form (CAN-4) and the following information and documents must be submitted:

Protocol
Summary of potential risks/benefits
Clinical trial attestation that includes drug information (chemistry, names, classifications, dosage, therapeutic purpose, human-sourced excipient, drug identification number or notice of compliance, manufacturing information); sponsor’s contact information; if the drug is to be imported, contact information for the sponsor’s representative in Canada who is responsible for the sale of the drug; and contact information for the qualified investigator at each site, if known at the time of submittal
Contact information for each institutional ethics committee (EC) (known as Research Ethics Board (REB) in Canada) that approved the protocol, if known at the time of submitting the application
Contact information of any institutional EC that previously refused to approve the protocol, its reasons, and refusal date
Investigator’s Brochure (IB)
Informed consent form (ICF)
Information about use of a human-sourced excipient
Chemistry and manufacturing information
Proposed date for trial commencement at each site, if known
Refer to the CanadaFDR, the G-CanadaCTApps, the G-DrugApp, the G-QltyBioCTs, and the G-QCM-PharmCTAs for detailed submission information.

Ethics Committee Requirements

Each institutional EC has its own application form and clearance requirements, which can differ significantly regarding the number of copies to be supplied and application format requirements. However, the following requirements comply with the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, and are basically consistent across all Canadian ECs:

Clinical protocol
ICFs and participant information
Participant recruitment procedures
IB
Safety information
Participant payments and compensation
Investigator(s) current curriculum vitaes (CVs)
Additional required institutional EC documentation
See section 3.1.2 of CAN-52 for additional submission content requirements.

The G-TCPS2, which sets the ethical benchmark for all Canadian institutional ECs, requires clinical trial researchers to include a plan for monitoring safety, efficacy/effectiveness (where feasible), and validity in their proposal for EC review. See the G-TCPS2 for additional details on the plan’s required contents.

See CAN-35 for submission requirements to the joint HC-Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)'s REB. This joint EC reviews all research involving human subjects that is carried out by HC or PHAC researchers, on the premises, or in collaboration with external researchers.

Clinical Protocol

As delineated in CAN-52, the clinical protocol should include the following elements:

General information
Background information
Trial objectives and purpose
Trial design
Participation selection/withdrawal
Participant treatment
Efficacy assessment
Safety assessment
Statistics
Direct access to source data/documents
Quality control/quality assurance procedures
Ethical considerations
Data handling and record keeping
Financing and insurance
Publication policy
Supplements
For complete protocol requirements, see section 6 of CAN-52.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 19, 2025
Overview

As delineated in the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, the review and approval of a clinical trial application (CTA) by Health Canada (HC) and an institutional ethics committee (EC) (known as Research Ethics Board (REB) in Canada) may be conducted in parallel. However, per the CanadaFDR, the G-CanadaCTApps, CAN-6, and CAN-30, HC will not authorize the sponsor to begin the clinical trial until an institutional EC approval (provided in the required Clinical Trial Site Information (CTSI) form) for each participating trial site is submitted. For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100.

Regulatory Authority Approval

According to the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, an authorized clinical trial is one that has been filed with HC and has not received an objection within 30 days. All CTAs are subject to the 30-day default period from the date of receipt of the completed application at the appropriate Directorate within HC’s Health Products and Food Branch (HPFB). While the Directorates can establish shorter administrative targets of seven (7) days for the review of bioequivalence trials, the 30-day default system remains the regulatory requirement. Applications to conduct Phase I clinical trials using somatic cell therapies, xenografts, gene therapies, prophylactic vaccines, or reproductive and genetic technologies are not included in the seven-day target system. Please see the G-CanadaCTApps for special requirements regarding reviews of comparative bioavailability studies and joint reviews of clinical trials covering a combination of devices, biologics, and pharmaceuticals.

As specified in the G-CanadaCTApps and the G-MDSA, during the review period, the Directorate may request additional information from the sponsor, who has two (2) calendar days to provide such information. The G-MDSA clarifies that, where warranted, HC can adjust the timelines to be longer or shorter based on the complexity of the request, communications with the sponsor, and/or circumstances of the review, including pausing the clock during the scientific review. According to the G-CanadaCTApps and the G-MDSA, if HC authorizes the CTA, then it issues a No Objection Letter (NOL). If HC rejects the CTA, it sends a Not Satisfactory Notice (NSN). HC will issue an NSN if it identifies significant deficiencies. The sponsor may resubmit the information and material at a future time, and it will be processed as a new CTA. The G-CanadaCTApps also states that HC will issue an NSN if a timely response to requested information has not been provided. The G-MDSA indicates that the review of the submission will stop on the date the NSN is sent.

Ethics Committee Approval

The EC review and approval process timeline varies by institution. However, according to the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, the institutional EC should review a proposed clinical trial within a reasonable time. The G-TCPS2, which sets the ethical benchmark for all Canadian institutional ECs, recommends a proportionate approach to ethics review—the lower the level of risk, the lower the level of scrutiny (delegated review); the higher the level of risk, the higher the level of scrutiny (full board review). In either case, pursuant to the G-TCPS2, the institutional EC should make its decisions in an efficient and timely manner. See CAN-35 for ethics review timelines with the joint HC-Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)'s EC. This joint EC reviews all research involving human subjects that is carried out by HC or PHAC researchers, on the premises, or in collaboration with external researchers.

Governance

CAN-35 states that PHAC researchers must obtain departmental approval of research involving humans before submitting their application to the joint HC-PHAC EC. For further information and to obtain the necessary form, contact the Office of the Chief Science Officer at email ocso.ethics-ethique.bcsc@phac-aspc.gc.ca.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, a clinical trial can only commence after the sponsor receives authorization from both Health Canada (HC) and an institutional ethics committee (EC) (known as Research Ethics Board (REB) in Canada). No waiting period is required following the applicant’s receipt of these approvals. CAN-30 specifies that for purposes of the Clinical Trial Site Information (CTSI) Form (CAN-6), the trial commencement date is the date when the clinical trial site is ready to enroll participants. The commencement date is a date after which the sponsor has both the HC authorization from the appropriate Directorate (date on the No Objection Letter (NOL)) and approval from the relevant EC. Further, the commencement date would be the date when the sponsor implements the protocol, which includes the screening period that occurs prior to the check-in date. See the Scope of Review section for detailed institutional EC requirements, and the Submission Content section for additional HC approval information. For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100.

In addition, per the G-CanadaCTApps, if a sponsor (Canadian or foreign) wants to import a drug into Canada to conduct a clinical trial, a copy of HC’s clinical trial authorization (i.e., the NOL) must be included with the drug shipment. According to the G-CanadaCTApps and CAN-32, if a sponsor plans to import investigational drugs directly to each trial site, then the sponsor must also authorize the importer (i.e., the clinical trial site) when submitting the clinical trial application using Appendix I of HC’s Drug Submission Application Form (CAN-4). See the Manufacturing & Import section for detailed import requirements.

Clinical Trial Agreement

Prior to initiating the trial, as delineated in the G-FDR-0100 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, the sponsor must sign an agreement between all involved parties, including ECs, Qualified Investigators (QIs), contract research organizations, and others, to ensure full compliance with the regulatory requirements. Further, the sponsor should obtain the investigator’s/institution's agreement:

To conduct the trial in compliance with good clinical practice, with the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and given approval/favorable opinion by the EC
To comply with procedures for data recording and reporting
To permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
To retain the trial-related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution these documents are no longer needed
The sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement.

In accordance with the G-CanadaCTApps, prior to initiating a clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that a Qualified Investigator Undertaking (QIU) form (CAN-37 or similar documentation that meets the CanadaFDR requirements) has been completed and is kept on file by the sponsor. Per the CanadaFDR, the form certifies that the QI will conduct the clinical trial in accordance with good clinical practice and will immediately inform trial participants and the institutional EC of trial discontinuance and the reason for this discontinuance. If there is a change in the QI at a site, a new CTSI Form must be submitted to HC, and a new QIU form must be maintained by the sponsor.

See CAN-6, CAN-8, and CAN-19 for additional clinical trial forms.

Clinical Trial Registration

As per the G-CanadaCTApps, sponsors should register their clinical trials on one (1) of two (2) publicly accessible registries accepting international clinical trial information and recognized by the World Health Organization (WHO), ClinicalTrials.gov (CAN-45), and the International Standardized Randomized Controlled Trial Number (ISRCTN) Registry (CAN-46). According to HCNotice-CTRegDisc, clinical trial registration is not a mandatory requirement at this time. However, per the G-TCPS2, which sets the ethical benchmark for all Canadian institutional ECs, clinical trials must be registered before recruitment of the first trial participant in a publicly accessible registry that is acceptable to the WHO or the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE). In addition, following registration, researchers are responsible for ensuring that the registry is updated in a timely manner with: new information; safety and, where feasible, efficacy reports; reasons for stopping a trial early; and the location of findings.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

According to the CanadaFDR and G-CanadaCTApps, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Canada’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any adverse occurrence in the health of a clinical trial subject who is administered a drug that may or may not be caused by the administration of the drug, and includes an adverse drug reaction.
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – Any noxious and unintended response to a drug that is caused by the administration of any dose of the drug.
Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) or Serious Adverse Event (SAE) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity, or causes a congenital anomaly/birth defect.
Serious, Unexpected ADR – A serious ADR that is not identified in nature, severity, or frequency in the risk information set out in the investigator’s brochure or on the label of the drug.
The G-TCPS2, which sets the ethical benchmark for all Canadian institutional ethics committees (ECs), requires researchers to promptly report new information revealed during the conduct of the trial that might affect the welfare or consent of participants to the EC, to a publicly accessible registry, and to other appropriate regulatory or advisory bodies. In addition, when new information is relevant to participants’ welfare, researchers must promptly inform all participants to whom the information applies (including former participants). Researchers must work with their ECs to determine which participants must be informed, and how the information should be conveyed.

For Health Canada (HC)’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100.

Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

Per CAN-52, which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, all SAEs should be reported immediately to the sponsor except for those SAEs that the protocol or other document (e.g., Investigator's Brochure) identifies as not needing immediate reporting. The immediate reports should be followed promptly by detailed, written reports. The immediate and follow-up reports should identify participants by unique code numbers assigned to the trial subjects rather than by their names, personal identification numbers, and/or addresses. The investigator should also comply with the applicable regulatory requirement(s) related to the reporting of unexpected serious ADRs to the regulatory authority(ies) and the EC. AEs and/or laboratory abnormalities identified in the protocol as critical to safety evaluations should be reported to the sponsor according to the reporting requirements and within the time periods specified by the sponsor in the protocol. For reported deaths, the investigator should supply the sponsor and the EC with any additional requested information (e.g., autopsy reports and terminal medical reports).

Sponsor Responsibilities

As delineated in the CanadaFDR, the G-CanadaCTApps, and CAN-22, the sponsor is required to expedite reports of ADRs to HC that meet these three (3) criteria: serious, unexpected, and having a suspected causal relationship. ADR reports that are expected or unexpected, but not serious, should not be reported to HC, but rather monitored and tracked by the sponsor. Further detail and clarifications on AE/ADR reporting criteria can be found in CAN-22. As specified in the G-CanadaCTApps, when evaluating whether an AE is serious and unexpected, the Qualified Investigator’s (QI) and sponsor’s determination of causality is important. Only serious and unexpected ADRs found to have a reasonable suspected causal relationship to the drug should be reported by the sponsor to HC.

Per the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, during a clinical trial, the sponsor is required to inform HC of any serious, unexpected ADR that has occurred inside or outside Canada. An ADR report must be filed in the following specified timelines:

When the ADR is neither fatal nor life-threatening, within 15 days after becoming aware of the information
When it is fatal or life-threatening, immediately when possible and, in any event, within seven (7) days after becoming aware of the information
Within eight (8) days after having informed HC of the ADR, submit a report that includes an assessment of the importance and implication of any findings
Other Safety Reports

The G-DSUR delineates that the development safety update report (DSUR) and the DSUR Checklist (CAN-38) should be provided when requested by HC. A DSUR may be submitted voluntarily to HC when important new safety information on a drug needs to be conveyed by a clinical trial sponsor. In these cases, a rationale/justification for the filing of the DSUR should be included in the cover letter. For additional details, see the G-DSUR.

The G-DSUR-CanUK describes the region-specific requirements for DSURs submitted to the regulatory authorities of Canada and the United Kingdom. This guidance applies to both marketed and non-marketed drugs that are used in clinical trials and applies to DSURs prepared by the manufacturer and/or marketing authorization holder of the investigational drug.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

As per the G-CanadaCTApps and CAN-22, all serious and unexpected ADRs should be reported individually to HC. According to CAN-48 (which Canada adopted pursuant to CAN-50), at a minimum, the report should include an identifiable patient, the name of a suspect medicinal product, an identifiable reporting source, and an event or outcome that can be identified as serious and unexpected and for which, in clinical investigation cases, there is a reasonable suspected causal relationship. The G-CanadaCTApps requires the sponsor to complete the expedited reporting form (CAN-5) and the CIOMS Form I (CAN-7) and fax them to the appropriate HC Directorate: BRDD Fax: 613-957-0364; PDD Fax: 613-941-2121.

Additionally, the G-DSUR indicates that HC recommends that DSURs in electronic Common Technical Document (eCTD) format be submitted via the Common Electronic Submission Gateway (CESG). For information on eCTD format, refer to the ElecSubms. For technical questions on eCTD filings, contact ereview@hc-sc.gc.ca as instructed in the G-DSUR.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

Pursuant to the CanadaFDR, the G-CanadaCTApps, CAN-22, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), investigators and sponsors share responsibility for submitting interim and annual reports on the status of a clinical trial. The investigator is required to provide annual progress reports to the institutional ethics committee (EC) and submit interim progress reports to the EC and Health Canada (HC) if there are any significant changes affecting the trial or risk to participants. The sponsor is required to submit annual reports (in the form of an updated Investigator’s Brochure (IB)) to HC. Note that per CAN-50, HC-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent. For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100.

As per CAN-52, which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, the investigator should promptly provide written reports to the sponsor and the institutional EC on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to participants.

According to the G-TCPS2, investigators must report new information that may affect the welfare or consent of participants to the institutional EC, HC, and other appropriate regulatory or advisory entities. When new information is relevant to participants’ welfare, researchers must promptly inform all participants to whom the information applies (including former participants). Researchers should work with their ECs to determine which participants must be informed, and how the information should be conveyed. New information may comprise a range of issues, including, but not limited to:

Changes to the research design
Evidence of any new risks
Unanticipated issues that have possible health or safety consequences for participants
New information that decisively proves the benefits of one (1) intervention over another
New research findings, including relevant non-trial findings
Unanticipated problems
Closure of trials at other sites for reasons that may be relevant to the welfare or consent of participants in the ongoing trial
Pursuant to CAN-52, the investigator should submit written summaries of the trial status to the institutional EC annually, or more frequently, if requested.

Final Report

Upon completion of the trial, as delineated in CAN-52, the investigator is required to submit a final report to the institutional EC summarizing the trial’s outcome. The CanadaFDR does not require submission of a final study report to HC.

Per the G-CanadaCTApps, the sponsor should notify the HC Directorate when a clinical trial is completed or a clinical trial site is closed. A study is considered to be completed after the last participant globally completes the "end of study" visit as defined in the protocol. The "end of study visit" is the final visit for study-related tests and procedures, including the capture of any final potential study-related adverse events, and usually occurs after the participant has completed/discontinued study drug administration. The "end of study visit" is normally an in-person visit, but for some studies it can also be carried out over the telephone. There may be certain scenarios (e.g., gene therapies, drugs with very long half-lives) where a study may be considered to be ongoing well beyond the period of study treatment, i.e., where long-term safety monitoring and reporting would be required. The reporting requirements with regards to such long-term follow-up of safety are normally specified in the study protocol and agreed to between the sponsor and HC prior to the authorization of the clinical trial in Canada.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Health Canada’s implementation of the ICH Harmonised Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) will go into effect on April 1, 2026, and stakeholders are expected to be in full compliance by that date. See the Health Canada notice for more details. 

As per the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, a sponsor is defined as an individual, corporate body, institution, or organization that conducts a clinical trial. The International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, expands on this definition to include individuals, companies, institutions, or organizations that take responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a clinical trial.

In accordance with CAN-52, Canada also permits a sponsor to transfer any or all of its trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO) and/or institutional site(s). However, the ultimate responsibility for the trial data’s quality and integrity always resides with the sponsor. Any trial-related responsibilities transferred to a CRO should be specified in a written agreement. The CRO should implement quality assurance and quality control. Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent.

According to the CanadaFDR and G-CanadaCTApps, a sponsor may be domestic or foreign. A foreign sponsor is required to have a senior medical or scientific officer who is residing in Canada who will represent the sponsor, and sign and date the application and the clinical trial attestation form.

For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Overview

As set forth in the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, the sponsor should select the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical trial, taking into account the appropriateness and availability of the study site and facilities. The sponsor must also ensure that the investigator(s) are qualified by training and experience. Furthermore, the sponsor must sign an agreement or contract with the participating institution(s). Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent.

In accordance with the G-CanadaCTApps, prior to initiating a clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that a Qualified Investigator Undertaking (QIU) form (CAN-37) (or similar documentation that meets the CanadaFDR requirements) has been completed and kept on file by the sponsor; it should be retained by the sponsor for 15 years. Per the CanadaFDR, the form certifies that the qualified investigator will conduct the clinical trial in accordance with good clinical practice, and will immediately inform trial participants and the institutional ethics committee (EC) (known as Research Ethics Boards in Canada) of trial discontinuance, and the reason for this discontinuance. (See the Submission Content section for additional information on clinical trial application requirements). For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100.

Per CAN-11, the Canadian Clinical Trials Asset Map (CCTAM) (CAN-26) is a pan-Canadian research inventory of investigators, clinical research sites, and other resources across the country. Sponsors can use CCTAM to identify potential sites and investigators, which may expedite study feasibility and start-up timelines. To view the CCTAM, the user must register and create an account.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

According to the CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, a sponsor may be domestic or foreign. A foreign sponsor is required to have a senior medical or scientific officer residing in Canada to represent the sponsor, and sign and date the application and the clinical trial attestation form.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

Although not specified as a sponsor requirement, CAN-52 states that a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) (known as an Independent Data-Monitoring Committee in Canada) may be established to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial.

The G-TCPS2 provides the following considerations to help researchers and ECs determine whether a DSMB is needed:

The magnitude of foreseeable research-attributable harms to participants
Whether the circumstances of the participants make them vulnerable in the context of research
The feasibility of interim data analysis
The complexity of the study
Conflicts of interest
Multicenter Studies

Per CAN-52, if a multicenter trial will be conducted, the sponsor must organize a coordinating committee or select coordinating investigators. In addition, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor, and, if required, by HC
The EC has given approval to the protocol
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
The responsibilities of coordinating investigator(s) and the other participating investigators are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, on complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and on completing the CRFs
Communication between investigators is facilitated
The CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps, require the sponsor to complete and retain the Research Ethics Board (REB) Attestation (CAN-8) and Qualified Investigator Undertaking (QIU) (CAN-37) forms at each trial site, while submitting in electronic format the Clinical Trial Site Information Form (CAN-6) to the appropriate HC Directorate for each trial site.

The G-TCPS2, which sets the ethical benchmark for all Canadian institutional ECs, provides that in multi-site clinical trials, a lead principal investigator (PI) is a designated PI who is responsible for the ethical conduct of the study for all sites. The lead PI is responsible for communicating any changes to the study, new information, and/or unanticipated events to the EC, to the sponsor, and to local site PIs.

Per CAN-50, Canada has implemented the ICH Guidance E17: Multi-Regional Clinical Trials (CAN-40), which describes general principles for the planning and design of multi-regional clinical trials with the aim of increasing the acceptability of these trials in global regulatory submissions. HC recognizes that the scope and subject matter of current HC guidance may not be entirely consistent with ICH guidance. In such circumstances, HC-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Insurance

The CanadaFDR does not require the sponsor to provide insurance coverage to investigators, institutions, or trial participants. However, the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, guides sponsors on providing insurance. Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent.

Compensation

Injury or Death

The Canadian regulations do not require compensation for trial participants in the event of trial-related injuries or death. However, CAN-52 indicates that the sponsor must explain to participants the compensation and/or treatment available to them in the event of trial-related injuries.

Trial Participation

The Canadian regulations do not require compensation for trial participation. However, as per the G-TCPS2 and CAN-52, the informed consent form (ICF) should contain a statement with a description of the anticipated prorated payment to the participant(s) that is reasonably expected for participation in the trial. Any compensation or incentive to participants must not be so excessive that it may unfairly influence participants or cause them to overlook important facts and risks. CAN-35 further states that the ICF should describe any compensation, incentives, or reimbursements to be paid or given to participants and how participant withdrawal will affect the offered compensation (e.g., prorated remuneration). If no compensation will be provided, this should be stated.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

Per the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, the sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, focusing on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. Per CAN-50, Canada implements the ICH Guidance E8(R1): General Considerations for Clinical Studies (CAN-49), which provides guidance on conduct during the clinical trial. Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent.

As indicated in CAN-52, the quality management system should use a risk-based approach that includes:

During protocol development, identifying processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results
Identifying risks to critical trial processes and data
Evaluating the identified risks against existing risk controls
Deciding which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept
Documenting quality management activities and communicate to those involved in or affected by these activities
Periodically reviewing risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant
In the clinical study report, describing the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarize important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken
As stated in the CanadaFDR and CAN-52, the sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol, CAN-52, and the applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor is responsible for obtaining agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. QC should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been correctly processed. A written agreement must be signed by both the sponsor and the investigator or any other parties involved with the clinical trial, verifying that both parties agree to the trial protocol, the monitoring and auditing practices, the SOPs, and their respective duties.

Per CAN-50, HC adopted and implements the ICH guidance on statistical principles for clinical trials (CAN-53), as well as the ICH addendum on estimands and sensitivity analysis (CAN-39), which presents a framework for defining an appropriate estimand for a clinical trial and conducting sensitivity analyses.

Monitoring Requirements

As part of its QA system, CAN-52 notes that the sponsor should ensure the trial is monitored and audited. The purpose of the audit should be to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, CAN-52, and other applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor should appoint auditors to review the clinical trial. The sponsor should ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience, and the auditors’ qualifications should be documented. The sponsor must also ensure that the audit is conducted in accordance with their own SOPs and the auditor observations are documented. The sponsor should develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The extent and nature of monitoring is flexible and permits varied approaches that improve effectiveness and efficiency. The sponsor may choose on-site monitoring, a combination of on-site and centralized monitoring, or, where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan).

Per the HCNotice-ICH-E19, HC adopted and implements ICH guidance on selective safety data collection in specific late stage pre-approval or post-approval clinical trials (CAN-15). Selective safety data collection refers to the recording of certain data by investigators in case report forms. It does not affect the monitoring and clinical care of individual trial participants or documentation of their adverse events in medical records. See the HCNotice-ICH-E19 and the CAN-15 for more information.

Per G-Inspections, regulated parties (sponsors, qualified investigators, contract research organizations, and any other party involved in the conduct of clinical trials) have mandatory responsibilities under the CanadaFDA and can be inspected. Foreign entities that conduct regulated activities in Canada, or in relation to a product imported in Canada, are also subject to Canadian law. During an inspection or a compliance verification, a regulated party is required to provide all reasonable assistance and information necessary for the HC inspector to perform their duties, including providing evidence that its facility, equipment, and practices and procedures meet the applicable requirements.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

The CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps state that if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor should inform HC no later than 15 days after the termination or suspension. In addition, the sponsor should provide HC with the reason(s) for the termination or suspension and its impact on the proposed or ongoing clinical trials related to the drug in Canada by the sponsor. The sponsor should also promptly notify the qualified investigators of the termination or suspension and advise them in writing of any potential risks to the participants’ health. Further, the G-CanadaCTApps states that the sponsor’s notification to HC should include confirmation that the sale or importation of the drug to the discontinued sites has been stopped and that reasonable measures to ensure the return of all unused quantities of the drug will be taken. This notification must also be submitted for premature discontinuation of a clinical trial or clinical trial site outside Canada where there are ongoing trials with the drug in Canada.

According to CAN-52, if it is discovered that noncompliance significantly affects or has the potential to significantly affect participant protection or reliability of trial results, the sponsor should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions. Further, the ethics committee (EC) should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

Per the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, when using systems for electronic trial data handling, the sponsor must ensure and document that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. To validate such systems, the sponsor should use a risk assessment approach that takes into consideration the system’s intended use and potential to affect human subject protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, the sponsor must maintain standard operation procedures (SOPs) that cover system setup, installation, and use. The SOPs should describe system validation and functionality testing, data collection and handling, system maintenance, system security measures, change control, data backup, recovery, contingency planning, and decommissioning. With respect to the use of these computerized systems, the responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the users should receive relevant training. Note per CAN-50, HC-implemented ICH guidelines take precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent. Refer to CAN-52 for additional information.

The G-FDR-0100 provides that if electronic records are generated during a clinical trial, then the electronic system must be validated to confirm that the system’s specifications meet the goals and requirements for the clinical trial. This evidence of validation should be kept for the required record retention period and available for inspection by Health Canada (HC) inspectors. See the G-FDR-0100 for additional details.

Records Management

As set forth in the CanadaFDR and the CanadaFDR1024, the sponsor must record, handle, and store all trial-related information to allow complete and accurate reporting, interpretation, and verification. The CanadaFDR requires the sponsor to maintain all trial-related records for a period of 15 years. Per the G-FDR-0100, sponsors may also be required to maintain records under provincial law, institutional policies, and contractual agreements with investigators, ethics committees (ECs), or others. Where it is not possible to comply with both sets of requirements, the CanadaFDR would govern and the records must be maintained for 15 years.

Pursuant to CanadaFDR1024, the sponsor must submit requested records to HC within 48 hours if safety concerns arise. Additionally, to facilitate inspection of a site, the sponsor must submit information to HC within seven (7) days of a request. Per CAN-8, an attestation must be completed by the EC that reviewed and approved the clinical trial. The completed attestation must be retained by the clinical trial sponsor for a period of 15 years. The attestation should not be submitted to HC unless requested.

In addition, CAN-52 states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Responsible Parties

The G-TCPS2, which sets the ethical benchmark for all Canadian institutional ethics committees (ECs), states that where researchers seek to collect, use, share, and access different types of information or data about participants, they should determine whether the information or data proposed in research may reasonably be expected to identify an individual. Researchers and ECs must consider whether information is identifiable or non-identifiable.

Data Protection

Per CAN-42, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada provides advice and information for individuals about protecting personal information, and enforces the two (2) federal privacy laws that set out the rules for how federal government institutions and certain businesses must handle personal information, including health data. The PrivAct covers the personal information-handling practices of federal government departments and agencies in Canada, and the PIPEDA regulates private businesses’ data protection practices. In addition, some provinces and territories have laws that deal specifically with protection of personal health information. See CAN-43 for a list of provincial and territorial privacy laws and webpages.

Per the G-TCPS2, in the research context, the most simplified method to protect participants is through the collection and use of anonymous or anonymized data. When anonymized data is not possible or desirable, a next best alternative is to use de-identified data, which is provided to the researcher in de-identified form and the existing key code is accessible only to a custodian or trusted third party who is independent of the researcher. Where it is not feasible to use anonymous or anonymized data for research, the ethical duty of confidentiality and the use of appropriate measures to safeguard information become paramount. Researchers should consult their ECs if they are uncertain about whether information proposed for use in research is identifiable (e.g., when proposing to link anonymized or coded data sets).

Consent for Processing Personal Data

Both PIPEDA and the PrivAct require consent for the use of personal data, including health data, except under prescribed conditions, such as for research or during emergencies. Also see CAN-43 for provincial and territorial privacy laws.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Health Canada’s implementation of the ICH Harmonised Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) will go into effect on April 1, 2026, and stakeholders are expected to be in full compliance by that date. See the Health Canada notice for more details. 

Obtaining Consent

In all Canadian clinical trials, a freely given informed consent is required from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the CanadaFDR, the G-TCPS2, CAN-35, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50. Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent. For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100.

As per the CanadaFDR, the G-TCPS2, and CAN-52, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by an institutional ethics committee (EC) (known as a Research Ethics Board (REB) in Canada) and provided to HC with the clinical trial application (CTA). (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.)

The G-TCPS2 and CAN-52 state that the qualified investigator (QI) must provide detailed research study information to the participant or legal representative/guardian. As delineated in the G-TCPS2, CAN-35, and CAN-52, the ICF content should be in plain language (i.e., non-technical and easy to understand) and provided in a format that facilitates understanding. For example, written documentation may be supplemented with audio and/or visual aids. The participant and legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate. CAN-35 notes that the person obtaining consent may also need to explain the consent form verbally to ensure that the participant fully understands the information. See CAN-35 for informed consent and assent templates and sample forms.

Re-Consent

According to CAN-52, any change in the ICF that is relevant to the participant’s consent should be approved by the institutional EC prior to implementing any changes. The participant or legal representative/guardian should also be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial. The communication of this information should be documented.

Per the G-TCPS2, consent must be maintained throughout the research project. Researchers have a continuous duty to provide participants with all information relevant to their ongoing consent to participate in the research. Consent begins with the initial contact (e.g., recruitment) and carries through to the end of participation in the study. Throughout the clinical trial, researchers have a continuous responsibility to provide participants and ECs with all information relevant to participants’ ongoing consent to participate in the research. The researcher also must notify participants of any changes to the research project that may affect them. These changes may have ethical implications, may be relevant to their decision to continue in the study, or may be unique to the particular circumstances of individual participants. Specifically, researchers must disclose changes to the risks or potential benefits of the research. Change in participant capacity is an important element of ongoing consent. Rather than an age-based approach to consent, researchers should use an approach based on decision-making capacity in compliance with any laws governing research participation. This includes those whose decision-making capacity is in the process of development, those whose decision-making capacity is diminishing or fluctuating, and those whose decision-making capacity remains only partially developed. Mechanisms should be in place from the outset to identify and address any changes that could affect consent. Further, within the limits of consent provided by the participant, researchers should disclose to the participant any material incidental findings discovered in the course of research. Incidental findings are considered to be material incidental findings if they are reasonably determined to have significant welfare implications for the participant or prospective participant. Where material incidental findings are foreseeable, researchers should inform participants during the initial consent process. In addition, researchers should develop a management plan for review by the EC. For more information on how to address material incidental findings, see G-ConsentMatIncFindings.

Language Requirements

CAN-35 further specifies that consent forms should be provided in the language that participants are most comfortable with. The G-TCPS2 and CAN-52 require the ICF to be presented in plain language that the participant is able to understand. Per CAN-35, ICFs should be translated where it is relevant to particular communities. If there is a language barrier, the G-TCPS2 indicates that the qualified investigator should select an intermediary who has the necessary language skills to ensure effective communication. Further, per CAN-35, the level of language used should be appropriate to the age and comprehension/reading level of the participant population, generally at approximately a grade 6-8 reading level.

Documenting Consent

As per the G-TCPS2, CAN-52, and CAN-35, the participant or legal representative/guardian, as well as the qualified investigator (QI), must sign and date the ICF. CAN-52 and the G-FDR-0100 state that the QI should retain the signed ICF. CAN-35 indicates that information letters and ICFs must be presented on institutional/department letterhead.

According to CAN-52, where the participant is illiterate and/or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. The witness should sign and date the ICF after the following steps have occurred:

The written ICF and any other written information to be provided to the participant is read and explained to the participant and legal representative/guardian
The participant and legal representative/guardian have orally consented to the participant’s involvement in the trial, and have signed and dated the ICF, if capable of doing so
Before participating in the study, the participant or legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF.

As per the G-TCPS2 and CAN-52, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or appear to waive the participant’s legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representative(s) from their liabilities for any negligence.

Per CAN-35, in some situations, written consent is not feasible or desirable, for example due to logistical issues or because of the preferences of the participants. In addition, some individuals may perceive written consent as an attempt to legalize the consent process, thereby creating mistrust. It is also important to recognize that in some cultures written consent is not consistent with community traditions. In these cases, it may be more appropriate to use a handshake, a verbal agreement, or oral consent. The G-TCPS2 further indicates that researchers can use a range of procedures to seek and document consent, including oral consent documented in field notes, and other forms of recording (e.g., a consent log, audio or video recordings, or other electronic means). Evidence of consent may also be documented via completed questionnaires (in person, by mail, or by email or other electronic means). ECs should consider the power relationship that might exist between researchers and participants, and whether a waiver of the requirement for signed written consent may affect the welfare of the participants. If researchers plan to obtain non-written consent, they must explain their strategy to the EC.

Waiver of Consent

As explained in the G-TCPS2, there are research situations that call for alterations of consent. The EC may approve research that involves an alteration to the consent requirements if the EC is satisfied, and documents that all of the following apply:

The research involves no more than minimal risk to the participants
The change to consent requirements is unlikely to adversely affect the welfare of participants
It is impossible or impracticable to carry out the research and to address the research question properly, given the research design, if the prior consent of participants is required
In the case of a proposed alteration, the exact nature and extent of any proposed alteration is defined
There is a plan to brief participants and offer the option of refusing consent and/or withdrawing data and/or human biological materials
Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Based on the G-TCPS2, the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), and CAN-35, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions in plain language, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study involves research and an explanation of its purpose and duration
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
The procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The participant’s responsibilities
Those aspects of the trial that are experimental
Any reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant and, when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
Any reasonably expected benefits; if no benefit is expected, the participant should be made aware of this
The disclosure of specific alternative procedure(s) or therapies available to the participant, and their important potential benefits and risks
Compensation and/or treatment available to the participant in the event of a trial-related injury
The anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
Any expenses the participant needs to pay to participate in the trial
That participation is voluntary, and that the participant can refuse to participate or withdraw from the trial, at any time, without penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled
Information concerning the possibility of commercialization of research findings, and the presence of any real, potential, or perceived conflicts of interest on the part of the researchers, their institutions, or the research sponsors
Confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained, and permission given to monitors, the auditors, the ethics committee (EC), and Health Canada (HC) to access the participant’s medical records to verify the procedures and/or data, without violating the confidentiality of the participant, insofar as the applicable laws and regulations permit, and that, by signing a written ICF, the participant or legal representative/guardian is authorizing such access
That records identifying the participant will not be made publicly available, insofar as the applicable laws and/or regulations permit; if the results of the trial are published, the participant’s identity will remain confidential
The participant or legal representative/guardian will be notified in a timely manner if information becomes available that may affect the participant’s willingness to continue
The qualified investigator’s contact information for further information regarding the trial and the rights of participants, and whom to contact in the event of a trial-related injury
The identity and contact information of a qualified designated representative who can explain scientific or scholarly aspects of the research to participants
Information on stopping rules, foreseeable circumstances, and/or reasons under which the participant’s involvement in the trial may be terminated
The approximate number of participants in the trial
Per CAN-50, Canada has implemented CAN-52.

Per CAN-35, if blood is taken, indicate total volume (e.g., teaspoons and milliliter equivalent) and note the possibility of bruising or swelling while giving blood, or other possible discomforts at the site where blood is drawn. Further, state that there may be minimal chance of infection and that discomforts experienced will be brief and transient.

CAN-35 also indicates that participants should not be told if an EC has approved the study, since this may appear to offer a guarantee of safety. Further, no clause or language should be used to excuse or appear to excuse investigators or other persons or institutions involved from liability for their negligence or other faults. Sample consent forms can be found in CAN-35.

See the Vulnerable Populations and Consent for Specimen sections for further information.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the CanadaFDR, the G-TCPS2, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), Canada’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. The G-TCPS2 and CAN-52, which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, state that a participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process. Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent. For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100.

The informed consent template in CAN-35 provides that if a participant has any questions about their rights, they should contact:

Health Canada-PHAC Research Ethics Board Secretariat
70 Colombine Driveway, Room 941C, PL: 0909C
Brooke Claxton Building, Tunney's Pasture
Ottawa, ON K1A 0K9
Telephone: 613-941-5199
Fax: 613-941-9093
reb-cer@hc-sc.gc.ca

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As stated in the G-TCPS2 and CAN-52, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that they may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

Per CAN-35, participants should be assured that their participation is completely voluntary, they are under no obligation to participate, and they are free to withdraw at any time without consequence. It should be made clear that their decision to withdraw will not influence their relationship with the researcher in any way. The researcher should explain what will happen to participant samples or data if they choose to withdraw. If applicable, clearly state the point in the study at which removal of samples or data becomes difficult or impossible.

The Right to Information

As per the G-TCPS2 and CAN-52, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation or treatment in the case of injury, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

According to the G-TCPS2 and CAN-52, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right.

Per CAN-35, the ICF should explain what information will be collected about participants and for what purpose, including the type of information that will be collected (e.g., will it be coded or de-identified?) and how it will be stored. Further, the ICF should state who will have access to the collected information and describe the efforts that will be made to prevent the risk of participant re-identification. Limits to confidentiality and additional requirements for projects led by HC or the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) are provided in CAN-35.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The G-TCPS2 and CAN-52 state that the research participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the individual responsible for addressing trial-related inquiries and/or the participant’s rights.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

CAN-52, which upholds the Declaration of Helsinki, clearly state that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of their health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

See the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
The G-TCPS2 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, make provisions to protect the rights of a research participant during the informed consent process when the procedure is complicated by medical emergencies. Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent. As per CAN-52, in an emergency, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) has not been obtained from the research participant or legal representative/guardian, or, if an effective treatment is lacking but the investigational product could address the participant’s emergency needs, the clinical trial may be conducted. However, the method used on the participant must be explained clearly in the trial protocol, and the ethics committee (EC) (known as Research Ethics Board (REB) in Canada) must approve the protocol in advance. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible, and consent to continue and other consent should be requested, as appropriate.

Per G-TCPS2, research involving medical emergencies must be conducted only if it addresses the emergency needs of the individuals involved, and then only in accordance with criteria established in advance of such research by the EC. The EC may allow research that involves medical emergencies to be carried out without the consent of participants, or legal representatives/guardians, if all of the following apply:

A serious threat to the prospective participant requires immediate intervention
Either no standard efficacious care exists, or the research offers a realistic possibility of direct benefit to the participant in comparison with standard care
Either the risk is not greater than that involved in standard efficacious care, or it is clearly justified by the prospect for direct benefits to the participant
The prospective participant is unconscious or lacks capacity to understand the risks, methods, and purposes of the research project
Authorization from the legal representative/guardian cannot be secured in sufficient time, despite diligent and documented efforts to do so
No relevant prior directive by the participant is known to exist
Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Overview

As per the G-TCPS2, in all Canadian clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. The International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52) characterizes vulnerable populations as those who may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation, or of a retaliatory response from not participating. Examples are members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students; subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel; employees of the pharmaceutical industry; members of the armed forces; and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable subjects include patients with incurable diseases, persons in nursing homes, unemployed or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.

CAN-52, which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, specifies that ethics committees (ECs) (known as Research Ethics Boards in Canada) must pay special attention to protecting participants who are from vulnerable populations. Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent.

See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Per CAN-35, because the G-TCPS2 does not specify an age of consent for children, the decision on whether to seek consent from children is based on whether they have the capacity to understand the research and the risks and benefits of their participation. Youth who have not reached the age of majority (either 18 or 19 depending on the province or territory) may still be old enough to provide their own consent. For children who are not sufficiently mature to provide consent but are able to understand the nature of study participation, researchers must obtain the child’s assent in addition to the consent of an authorized third party. The decision of a child not to assent must be respected regardless of whether third-party consent was obtained.

CAN-35 provides the following criteria for determining whether participants can provide their own consent, or whether an authorized third party should be involved:

The risk level associated with the research project
The legal requirements for age of consent in that jurisdiction
The characteristics of the research participant (e.g., maturity level)
In certain cases, the topic of the research itself
CAN-35 states that it is generally accepted that youth can consent to minimal risk studies at 16 years of age, and that assent should be sought from children beginning at approximately seven (7) years of age. However, it is ultimately up to the researcher to determine whether to obtain assent or consent from children, and to provide the rationale for this decision to the ethics committee (EC) (known as a Research Ethics Board in Canada). Researchers should also consider that within a single research project, some minors may be capable of consenting while others may not. See CAN-35 for additional details regarding obtaining consent from minors.

As per the G-TCPS2 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), when the research participant is a child, the informed consent form (ICF) must be signed by the child’s parent/legal guardian. All pediatric participants, however, should be informed to the extent compatible with the child’s understanding, and if capable, the pediatric participant should sign and personally date the ICF. Per CAN-50, Canada has implemented CAN-52. Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent.

As stated in G-TCPS2, children should only participate in clinical studies when the research objective cannot be achieved with adult participants only. When considering the inclusion of children in research, the investigators and ECs must consider a child’s stage of physical, physiological, psychological, and social development to ensure adequate protections for the child’s welfare.

Assent Requirements

Per G-TCPS2 and TCPS2-InterpCnsnt, where a child has some ability to understand the significance of the research, the researcher must ascertain the wishes of that individual with respect to participation. Children—whose decision-making capacity is in the process of development—may be capable of verbally or physically assenting to, or dissenting from, participation in research. While their assent would not be sufficient to permit them to participate in the absence of consent by the child’s parent/legal guardian, their expression of dissent must be respected.

Further, according to CAN-12, which offers best practices and guidance to researchers and ECs in pediatric research and complements the G-TCPS2, provincial laws in Canada vary as to when a child is presumed to be legally competent to provide informed consent. Some provinces use age while others use a competence-based evaluation.

As per CAN-12, if the pediatric participant has the capacity for assent, then affirmative assent is required to participate in a study according to the participant’s level of development and capacities. When the child develops the legal capacity to provide informed consent or attains the legal age of majority (which depends on the province), researchers should obtain an informed consent. Regarding dissent, CAN-12 states that the researchers must respect the dissent of a child who is capable of understanding.

CAN-35 provides sample assent forms and templates. For more detail and guidance about best practices for research involving pediatric participants, see CAN-12.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
As per the G-TCPS2, studies involving women of childbearing age, or who are pregnant, require additional safeguards to ensure that the research assesses the risks to the women and the fetuses. The following guidance applies to research involving materials related to human reproduction:

Research using materials related to human reproduction in the context of an anticipated or ongoing pregnancy must not be undertaken if the information can reasonably be obtained by alternative methods
Materials related to human reproduction for research use must not be obtained through commercial transaction, including exchange for services
Per the G-TCPS2, research on in vitro embryos already created and intended for implantation to achieve pregnancy is acceptable if:

The research is intended to benefit the embryo
Research interventions will not compromise the care of the woman, or the subsequent fetus
Researchers closely monitor the safety and comfort of the woman and the safety of the embryo
Consent was provided by the gamete donors
According to the G-TCPS2, research involving embryos that have been created for reproductive or other purposes permitted by law, but are no longer required for these purposes, may be ethically acceptable if:

The ova and sperm from which they are formed were obtained in accordance with the G-TCPS2
Consent was provided by the gamete donors
Embryos exposed to manipulations not directed specifically to their ongoing normal development will not be transferred for continuing pregnancy
Research involving embryos will take place only during the first 14 days after their formation by combination of the gametes, excluding any time during which embryonic development has been suspended
Per the G-TCPS2, research involving a fetus or fetal tissue:

Requires the consent of the woman
Must not compromise the woman’s ability to make decisions regarding continuation of her pregnancy
In accordance with the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, informed consent requirements for conducting clinical trials with pregnant or nursing women or fetuses follow the general requirements listed in the Required Elements section. Specifically, the informed consent form should include a statement on the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant. Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
According to the G-TCPS2 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, prisoners are considered vulnerable because incarceration could affect their ability to make a voluntary decision regarding participation in research. A research study involving prisoners should ensure that these prospective participants are informed and are given the opportunity to make their own decisions without any interference from a higher authority. Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
According to the G-TCPS2 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), the ethics committee (EC) (known as Research Ethics Board in Canada) must approve the participation of research participants who are mentally or physically incapable of giving consent. Per CAN-50, Canada has implemented CAN-52.

Per CAN-35, adults with diminished decision-making capacity include:

Individuals whose decision-making capacity remains only partially developed, such as those living with permanent cognitive impairment, and
Individuals who once were capable of making an autonomous decision regarding consent but whose decision-making capacity is diminishing or fluctuating (e.g., due to cognitive impairment resulting from an injury or disease).
Per CAN-35, as is the case for any vulnerable population, care must be taken to ensure that adults with diminished decision-making capacity are not inappropriately included in research because of their situation, and neither should they be excluded from participating in research that may benefit them.

The G-TCPS2 indicates that for research involving individuals who lack the capacity, either permanently or temporarily, to decide for themselves whether to participate, the EC must ensure that, at a minimum, the following conditions are met:

The researcher involves participants who lack the capacity to decide on their own behalf to the greatest extent possible in the decision-making process
The researcher seeks and maintains consent from the participant’s legal representative/guardian in accordance with the best interests of the persons concerned
The legal representative/guardian is not the researcher or any other member of the research team
The researcher demonstrates that the research is being carried out for the participant’s direct benefit, or for the benefit of other persons in the same category; if the research does not have the potential for direct benefit to the participant but only for the benefit of the other persons in the same category, the researcher shall demonstrate that the research will expose the participant to only a minimal risk and minimal burden, and demonstrate how the participant’s welfare will be protected throughout the participation in research
When authorization for participation was granted by a legal representative/guardian, and a participant acquires or regains decision-making capacity during the course of the research, the researcher must promptly seek the participant’s consent as a condition of continuing participation
Per CAN-35 and the G-TCPS2, the participant’s legal representative/guardian can provide consent for adults who lack the capacity to decide on their own behalf in accordance with the best interests of the persons concerned. In such cases, participants should still be involved to the greatest extent possible in the decision-making process, and their assent to participate must be obtained if they are capable of expressing their wishes in a meaningful way (whether verbally or physically). Importantly, when authorization for participation was granted by the participant’s legal representative/guardian and a participant acquires or regains decision-making capacity during the course of the research, the researcher must promptly seek the participant’s consent as a condition of continuing participation.

Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Health Canada’s implementation of the ICH Harmonised Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) will go into effect on April 1, 2026, and stakeholders are expected to be in full compliance by that date. See the Health Canada notice for more details. 

As delineated in the CanadaFDR, the G-GMP-Annex13, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), an investigational product is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial, including a product with a marketing authorization when used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a way different from the approved form. Per CAN-50, Canada has implemented CAN-52. Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent.

For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Manufacturing

As specified in the CanadaFDR, the G-CanadaCTApps, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), Health Canada (HC) authorizes the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) in Canada. HC approves the manufacture of IPs as part of the clinical trial application (CTA) approval. Per CAN-50, Canada has implemented CAN-52. Note that per CAN-50, HC-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent. The G-QCM-PharmCTAs provides guidance and templates to assist sponsors in completing the quality portion of the CTA, which in turn, enables HC to assess IP characteristics adequately. The G-GMP-Annex13 requires the sponsor to ensure that IPs for clinical trials are manufactured and imported in accordance with its provisions and with CanadaFDR requirements. Per the G-CanadaCTApps, sponsors must file amendments or notifications to a previously authorized CTA when manufacturing changes are proposed that may affect the quality or safety of the clinical trial drug or biologic supplies.

Import

Per the CanadaFDR and the G-FDR-0100, HC authorizes the sponsor to import an IP. A sponsor who is not based in Canada must have a Canadian representative who is responsible for the import of the IP and demonstrates compliance with the applicable regulatory requirements. This representative should be the sponsor’s senior medical or scientific officer residing in Canada and is responsible for providing an attestation with respect to the CTA at the time of filing. Per the G-CanadaCTApps, the G-DrugApp, and CAN-4, if clinical trial drugs are to be imported into Canada, the authorization template (Appendix 1) in CAN-4 should be completed and submitted for each importer in Canada. The G-DrugApp states that Canadian importer(s) must be located within Canada. As additional importers are identified, additional copies of the authorization template in CAN-4 should be provided to HC. The G-FDR-0100, provides additional guidance on requirements if a sponsor plans to send the clinical trial IP(s) directly to each trial site:

Each party, including individual Canadian clinical trial sites, importing drugs directly (i.e., receiving drug shipments directly from outside of Canada) is identified on Appendix 1 of the Drug Submission Application Form (HC/SC 3011 form) (CAN-4) for Phase I-III trials (submitted with the application if known at the time or prior to importation at the site). Appendix 1 may be replicated as many times as necessary to capture all importing parties.
Clinical Trial Site Information (CTSI) forms (CAN-6) for each Canadian site conducting the clinical trial are submitted to HC for Phase I-III trials, prior to the start of the study.
Systems are in place, when appropriate, to monitor the transportation and storage conditions from the foreign source to the various clinical trial sites across Canada.
There is documented accountability of the imported drugs used in clinical trials and distributed to various clinical trial sites located in Canada, including the disposition of drugs returned from the clinical trial sites.
A written agreement is in place between the sponsor and the qualified investigator describing their specific responsibilities, and this agreement is available at the clinical trial site.
There is evidence that the drugs used in clinical trials conducted in Canada meet Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) requirements (e.g., certificates of manufacture, certificates of analysis, and/or evidence of approved lot release by a qualified individual).
The G-CanadaCTApps, the G-HlthProdImprtExptReqs, the G-FDR-0100, and CAN-32 state that if a sponsor wants to import a drug into Canada for a clinical trial, a copy of HC’s authorization (i.e., the No Objection Letter (NOL)) issued by either the Pharmaceutical Drugs Directorate (PDD) or the Biologic and Radiopharmaceutical Drugs Directorate (BRDD) must be included for the applicable trial with the shipment. A copy of this authorization must be provided at the port of entry. The G-HlthProdImprtExptReqs states that drugs without a Drug Identification Number may be imported where authorized for a Canadian clinical trial and a NOL was issued. The G-FDR-0100 further states that if 30 days have passed and the NOL was not issued, specific requests to import IPs should be directed to the Health Product Border Compliance Program at the following email account: hc.hpbcp-pcpsf.sc@canada.ca. Note that a sponsor does not have to submit a CTA for authorization to import an IP used in a Phase IV clinical trial.

Per CanadaFDR, the sponsor can make the following changes to the authorized use or importation of drugs if the sponsor notifies HC in writing within 15 days after the date of the change:

A change to the chemistry and manufacturing information that does not affect the quality or safety of the drug
A change to the protocol that does not alter the risk to the health of a clinical trial subject
Other changes must follow the amendment requirements delineated in the CanadaFDR. See the G-FDR-0100 for additional HC interpretations of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

In accordance with the CanadaFDR and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, the sponsor is responsible for providing the investigators with an Investigator’s Brochure (IB). The CanadaFDR and CAN-52 specify that the IB must contain all of the relevant information on the investigational product(s) (IPs), including significant physical, chemical, pharmaceutical, pharmacological, toxicological, pharmacokinetic, metabolic, and clinical information. The sponsor must ensure that an up-to-date IB is made available to the investigator(s), and the investigator(s) must provide an up-to-date IB to the ethics committee. Note that per CAN-50, Health Canada (HC)-implemented ICH guidance takes precedence over other HC guidance when they are not consistent. For HC’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100.

The CanadaFDR and CAN-52 require the IB to provide coverage of the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation parameters
Non-clinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects of IP in humans (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; and regulatory and post-marketing experiences)
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator(s)
See Section 7.3 of CAN-52 for detailed content guidelines.

In accordance with the G-CanadaCTApps and CAN-22, the sponsor must submit annually to HC an updated IB, which serves as the annual report, including all safety information and global status. Revisions that are more frequent may be appropriate depending on the stage of development and the generation of relevant new information.

Quality Management

Pursuant to CAN-52, the sponsor must maintain a Certificate of Analysis to document the identity, purity, and strength of the IP(s) to be used in the clinical trial. As specified in CAN-52, G-GMP-CAN, and G-GMP-Annex13, the sponsor must ensure that the products are manufactured in accordance with Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP). The G-GMP-CAN requires a quality management system, incorporating GMP, to ensure that IPs are of the quality required for their intended use. Per the G-GMP-Annex13, the manufacturer’s quality system should be described in written procedures and available to the sponsor, taking into account GMP principles and guidelines.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Canada must comply with the requirements set forth in the CanadaFDR, the G-CanadaCTApps, the G-GMP-Annex13, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52). The CanadaFDR and the G-CanadaCTApps state that for an IP to be used in a clinical trial, it must be properly labeled in both official languages: English and French. The CanadaFDR requires that IPs be packaged and labelled under the supervision of personnel who have had satisfactory technical, academic, and other training. The packager and/or labeler must have written procedures and ensure that the IP is packaged, labelled, and tested in compliance with those procedures. For Health Canada (HC)’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the CanadaFDR, see the G-FDR-0100. Per CAN-50, Canada has implemented CAN-52.

As delineated in the CanadaFDR and the G-GMP-Annex13, the following information must be included on the IP label:

A statement indicating that the drug is an investigational drug to be used only by a qualified investigator
Name, number, or identifying mark
Expiration date
Recommended storage conditions
Lot number
Sponsor’s name and address
Protocol code or identification
Radiopharmaceutical information, if applicable
With regard to the expiration date, the G-GMP-Annex13 further states that if it becomes necessary to change the expiration date, an additional label should be affixed to the IP. This additional label should state the new expiration date and repeat the batch number. It may be superimposed on the previous expiration date, but for quality control reasons, not on the original batch number. This operation should be performed at an appropriately authorized manufacturing site. However, when justified, it may be performed at the investigational site by or under the supervision of the clinical trial site pharmacist, or other health care professional in accordance with national regulations and with the sponsor’s requirements. Where this is not possible, it may be performed by the clinical trial monitor(s) who should be appropriately trained. The operation should be performed in accordance with good manufacturing practice (GMP) principles, specific and standard operating procedures and under contract, if applicable, and should be checked by a second person. This additional labelling should be properly documented in both the trial documentation and in the packaging records.

In addition, CAN-52 state that the IP must be coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

Per CanadaFDR, drugs must be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with good manufacturing practice (GMP). As defined in the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52), which Canada has implemented per CAN-50, the sponsor must supply the investigator(s) with the investigational products (IP(s)), including the comparator and placebo, if applicable. The sponsor should not supply the IP(s) until approvals from Health Canada (HC) and the institutional ethics committee (EC) are obtained. CAN-52 specifies that the sponsor must ensure the following:

Timely delivery of the IP(s)
Records maintained for IP document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction
Written procedures including instructions for IP handling and storage, adequate and safe receipt of the IP(s), dispensing of the IP(s), retrieval of unused IP(s), return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor, and disposal of unused IP(s) by the sponsor
IP product quality and stability over the period of use
IP manufactured according to any application of GMP
Proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP(s)
Acceptable IP handling and storage conditions and shelf-life
For IP packaging, the G-GMP-Annex13 provides the following guidance:

The risk of product mix up must be minimized by using appropriate procedures, specialized equipment, and relevant staff training.
To prevent errors, particularly when IPs are blinded, use heightened precautions, such as label reconciliation, line clearance, and in-process control checks by appropriately trained staff.
The packaging must ensure that the IP remains in good condition during transport and storage at intermediate destinations; any opening or tampering of the outer packaging during transport should be readily discernible.
The G-Storage provides principles and interpretations on the environmental control of clinical trial drugs during storage and transportation, including packaging. See G-Storage for information regarding compliance with the CanadaFDA and the CanadaFDR, as it relates to packaging clinical trial drugs for human use, such as the role of environmental controls, quality risk management, and special considerations for active pharmaceutical ingredients. In addition, CAN-52 state that the IP must be packaged in a manner that will prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage. Refer to CAN-52 for detailed sponsor-related IP requirements.

Record Requirements

As set forth in the CanadaFDR, the G-FDR-0100, and the CanadaFDR1024, the sponsor must record, handle, and store all trial-related information to allow complete and accurate reporting, interpretation, and verification. The CanadaFDR states that the sponsor should maintain all trial-related records for a period of 15 years. Pursuant to CanadaFDR1024, the sponsor must submit requested records to HC within 48 hours if safety concerns arise. Additionally, to facilitate inspection of a site, the sponsor must submit information to HC within seven (7) days of a request.

The G-Storage provides that when contracted parties, such as warehouses or commercial carriers, store or transport drugs, there should be a written agreement that outlines all relevant conditions.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
In Canada, a specimen is referred to as “human biological material” or “biological material.” According to the G-TCPS2, human biological materials include tissues, organs, blood, plasma, skin, serum, DNA, RNA, proteins, cells, hair, nail clippings, urine, saliva, and other body fluids. The term also comprises materials related to human reproduction, including embryos, fetuses, fetal tissues, and human reproductive materials. The G-TCPS2 breaks down human biological material further into the following categories: anonymized, anonymous, coded, and identified human biological materials. Refer to the G-TCPS2 for more detailed information on these categories.

In addition, CAN-2 defines biological material as pathogenic and non-pathogenic microorganisms, proteins, and nucleic acids, as well as any biological matter that may contain microorganisms, proteins, nucleic acids, or parts thereof. Examples include, but are not limited to, bacteria, viruses, fungi, prions, toxins, genetically modified organisms, nucleic acids, tissue samples, diagnostic specimens, live vaccines, and isolates of a pathogen (e.g., pure culture, suspension, purified spores).

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
Import/Export

According to the G-HlthProdImprtExptReqs, Health Canada (HC) does not have jurisdiction over human biological materials to be imported for testing or research purposes. The G-HlthProdImprtExptReqs further states that all blood samples as well as cultures, diagnostic specimens, or research tissue are considered to be potential carriers of human or animal pathogens, and are regulated by the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA). Per CAN-24, and CAN-2, the PHAC’s Centre for Biosecurity oversees the licensing process under the authority of the HPTA and the HPTR. The HPTA states that a license must be issued by the Minister that authorizes the import or export of human pathogens or toxins.

As specified in the HPTA, the HPTR, and CAN-2, individuals planning to conduct controlled activities (including producing, possessing, handling, using, storing, providing access to, transferring, disposing of, releasing, abandoning, or importing/exporting) with a human pathogen or toxin, whether imported or domestically acquired, must obtain a license. Per CAN-2, because all human biological materials are potential carriers of human pathogens, the PHAC has categorized these materials by risk group based on risk to the individual/animal and risk to the community. Risk Group 1 consists of microorganisms, nucleic acids, or proteins that are unable or unlikely to cause human or animal disease so they are generally not considered to be pathogens, and are therefore exempt from the HPTA and the HPTR licensing requirements. Risk groups 2 through 4 are considered to be pathogens or toxins with moderate to high individual risk and low to high community risk, and are subject to the HPTA and the HPTR licensing requirements. See CAN-2 for detailed information and instructions on how to obtain a license for activities associated with Risk Groups 2 through 4.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 18, 2025
In accordance with the G-TCPS2, prior to collecting, storing, or using a research participant’s biological specimen(s), consent from the participant and/or the legal representative(s) and review/approval from the institutional ethics committee (EC) (known as Research Ethics Board (REB) in Canada) must be obtained. Specifically, consent is required from the following:

The participant who will be donating biological materials, or an authorized third party on behalf of a participant who lacks capacity, taking into account any research directive that applies to the participant, or
A deceased participant through a donation decision made prior to death, or by an authorized third party
In addition, the G-TCPS2 states that in order to seek participant consent to use the participant’s biological materials in research, the investigator(s) must provide the prospective participant or authorized third party with the following information:

The type and amount of biological materials to be taken
The manner in which biological materials will be taken, and the safety and invasiveness of the procedures
The intended uses of the biological materials, including any commercial use
The measures employed to protect the privacy of and minimize risks to participants
The length of time the biological materials will be kept, how they will be preserved, location of storage (e.g., in Canada or outside Canada), and process for disposal, if applicable
Any anticipated linkage of biological materials with information about the participant
The plan for handling results and findings, including clinically relevant information and incidental findings
The participant’s right to request the withdrawal of data or human biological materials, including any limitations on the feasibility of that withdrawal
Per CAN-35, if there is a possibility of secondary future use of biological materials, researchers should consider describing this possibility in the consent form and obtaining permission from participants to retain their data or biological materials for future use. If consent for future use is not obtained initially then researchers may be required to obtain re-consent from individuals in the future. Researchers should be as specific as possible when describing the potential future uses. For example, if future uses include possible genetic or genomic studies, this must be stated. The EC may not approve future uses that are too open-ended or too dissimilar from the initial use. It is generally preferable to give participants the opportunity to opt out of future use. If this option is not provided, researchers should be prepared to explain their decision to the EC. When seeking consent, researchers may wish to give participants different options for how their samples or data can be used, to accommodate differences in comfort levels among participants. In rare cases, it may be possible to use identifiable information for secondary use without the consent of the participants who provided that information. While the possibility of an exception may exist, the EC generally expects that researchers will make every reasonable effort to seek the consent of participants. Thus, the best practice is for researchers to always obtain consent for future use at the time of initial recruitment if there is any possibility of secondary use of data or biological materials. Also see the G-TCPS2 and the TCPS2-InterpCnsnt for additional details on confidentiality, future use of information, broad consent for the storage of data and human biological materials for future unspecified research, biobanks, and stem cell consent.

Requirements
(Legislation) Food and Drugs Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. F-27) (CanadaFDA – English and French) (Last Amended March 27, 2025)
Parliament of Canada
(Legislation) Human Pathogens and Toxins Act (S.C. 2009, c. 24) (HPTA) (Last Amended January 14, 2023)
Parliament of Canada
(Legislation) Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (S.C. 2000, c.5) (PIPEDA) (Last Amended March 4, 2025)
Parliament of Canada
(Legislation) Privacy Act (R.S.C., 1985, P-21) (PrivAct) (Last Amended June 2, 2025)
Parliament of Canada
(Regulation) Food and Drug Regulations, (CRC, c. 870) (CanadaFDR – English and French) (Last Amended July 1, 2025)
Parliament of Canada
(Regulation) Human Pathogens and Toxins Regulations (SOR/2015-44) (HPTR) (Last Amended December 1, 2015)
Parliament of Canada
(Regulation) Regulations Amending the Food and Drug Regulations (1024 - Clinical Trials) (CanadaFDR1024 – English and French) (Effective September 1, 2001)
Parliament of Canada
(Guidance) Annex 13 to the Current Edition of the Good Manufacturing Practices Guidelines - Drugs Used In Clinical Trials (GUI 0036) (G-GMP-Annex13) (Effective December 1, 2009)
Health Canada
(Guidance) Applying the Single REB Review Model for Multi-jurisdictional Minimal Risk Research (SingleECRev) (July 22, 2024)
Panel on Research Ethics, Government of Canada
(Guidance) Filing Submissions Electronically (ElecSubms) (Last Updated November 27, 2025)
Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada
(Guidance) Good Manufacturing Practices Guide for Drug Products (GUI 0001) (G-GMP-CAN) (Effective July 1, 2020)
Health Canada
(Guidance) Guidance Document - Development Safety Update Report (DSUR) - International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) Topic E2F (G-DSUR) (Effective December 4, 2015)
Health Canada
(Guidance) Guidance Document for Clinical Trial Sponsors: Clinical Trial Applications (G-CanadaCTApps) (Last Revised March 17, 2016)
Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada
(Guidance) Guidance Document: Part C, Division 5 of the Food and Drug Regulations “Drugs for Clinical Trials Involving Human Subjects” (G-FDR-0100) (Version 2) (Updated March 14, 2023)
Health Canada
(Guidance) Guidance Document: Preparation of Regulatory Activities in Non-eCTD Format (G-Non-eCTD) (Effective May 15, 2024)
Health Canada (*Note: Latest version available upon request. See Submission Process section for details)
(Guidance) Guidance Document: Quality (Chemistry and Manufacturing) Guidance: Clinical Trial Applications (CTAs) for Pharmaceuticals (G-QCM-PharmCTAs) (Effective June 1, 2009)
Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada
(Guidance) Guidance Document: The Management of Drug Submissions and Applications (G-MDSA) (Last Updated October 1, 2025)
Health Canada
(Guidance) Guidance for Completing the Drug Submission Application Form (G-DrugApp) (Last Updated March 31, 2021)
Health Canada
(Guidance) Guideline: Increasing Transparency when Presenting Safety Information in the Development Safety Update Report (DSUR): Region-Specific Requirements for Canada and the United Kingdom (G-DSUR-CanUK) (Last Updated July 6, 2021)
Health Canada
(Guidance) Guidelines for Environmental Control of Drugs During Storage and Transportation (GUI-0069) (G-Storage) (August 24, 2020)
Health Canada
(Guidance) How to Address Material Incidental Findings – Guidance in Applying TCPS2 (2018) Article 3.4 (G-ConsentMatIncFindings) (2019)
Panel on Research Ethics, Government of Canada
(Guidance) Importing and Exporting Health Products for Commercial Use (GUI-0117) (G-HlthProdImprtExptReqs) (Effective December 21, 2020)
Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada
(Guidance) POL-0030: Compliance and Enforcement Approach and Inspection Strategy for Clinical Trials of Drugs Involving Human Subjects (G-Inspections) (November 30, 2021)
Health Canada
(Guidance) Policy Statement: Use of Pharmacometrics in Drug Submissions and Clinical Trial Applications (G-Pharmacometrics) (Last Updated March 31, 2021)
Health Canada
(Guidance) Preparation of Clinical Trial Applications for Use of Cell Therapy Products in Humans (G-CTACell) (August 21, 2015)
Health Canada
(Guidance) Quality Requirements for Investigational Biologic Drugs Used in Clinical Trials: Notice to Clinical Trial Sponsors (G-QltyBioCTs) (Last Updated July 23, 2024)
Health Canada
(Guidance) TCPS 2 Interpretations – Consent (TCPS2-InterpCnsnt) (Last Updated March 1, 2024)
Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada
(Guidance) TCPS 2 Interpretations – REB Review (TCPS2-InterpReview) (Last Updated May 9, 2024)
Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada
(Guidance) Tri-Council Policy Statement: Ethical Conduct for Research Involving Humans (G-TCPS2) (December 2022)
Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada
(Guidance) Validation Rules for Regulatory Transactions in Electronic Common Technical Document (eCTD) Format (Rules-eCTD) (Version 5.3) (Effective May 31, 2025)
Health Canada
(Guidance) Validation Rules for Regulatory Transactions in Non-eCTD Format (Rules-Non-eCTD) (Version 5.3) (January 10, 2025)
Health Canada
(Not Available Online) Health Canada Guidance Document: Preparation of Regulatory Activities in the Electronic Common Technical Document (eCTD) Format (Effective March 13, 2020) (*Note: Latest version available upon request. See Submission Process section for details) (G-eCTD)
(Notice) Implementation of ICH E19: A Selective Approach to Safety Data Collection in Specific Late-stage Pre-approval or Post-approval Clinical Trials (HCNotice-ICH-E19) (Last Updated February 27, 2024)
Health Canada
(Notice) Update to Clinical Trial Site Information Form (HCNotice-CTSIForm) (Last Updated February 23, 2022)
Health Canada
(Notice) Update: Registration and Disclosure of Clinical Trial Information (HCNotice-CTRegDisc) (October 19, 2012)
Health Canada
Additional Resources
(Document) Best Practices for Health Research Involving Children and Adolescents: Genetic, Pharmaceutical, and Longitudinal Studies (CAN-12) (2012)
Centre of Genomics and Policy and Maternal Infant Child and Youth Research Network
(Document) Canadian Biosafety Standard (CBS) (CAN-2) (Third Edition) (Last Updated December 2024)
Public Health Agency of Canada
(Document) Research Ethics Board’s Operational Policy Framework: Ethics Review of Research Involving Human Subjects (CAN-13) (Last Updated April 1, 2016)
Health Canada
(Document) University of Calgary CHREB Administration Fee for Industry Sponsored Protocols (CAN-3) (May 1, 2023)
University of Calgary, Research Services, Calgary, Canada
(International Guidance) A Selective Approach to Safety Data Collection in Specific Late-Stage in Specific Pre-Approval or Post-Approval Clinical Trials E19 (CAN-15) (Step 5 Version) (December 21, 2023)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Addendum on Estimands and Sensitivity Analysis in Clinical Trials to the Guideline on Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials, E9 (R1) (CAN-39) (Step 5 Version) (July 21, 2020)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) General Considerations for Clinical Studies E8(R1) (CAN-49) (Step 5 Version) (January 14, 2022)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) General Principles for Planning and Design of Multi-Regional Clinical Trials E17 (CAN-40) (Step 5 Version) (April 12, 2019)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (CAN-48) (Step 5 Version) (October 27, 1994)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CAN-52) (Step 5 Version) (April 3, 2019)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials ICH Topic E9: Guidance for industry (CAN-53) (Step 5 Version) (February 10, 2003)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Not Available Online) Health Canada – Clinical Trial Applications in eCTD format (September 2022) (*Note: Only available upon request. See Submission Process section for details) (CAN-36)
(Webpage) Biologic and Radiopharmaceutical Drugs Directorate (CAN-17) (Last Updated December 19, 2022)
Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada
(Webpage) Canadian Clinical Trials Asset Map (CCTAM) (CAN-26) (Current as of July 18, 2025)
Canadian Clinical Trials Coordinating Centre
(Webpage) Clinical Trials - Background (CAN-31) (Last Updated May 4, 2017)
Health Canada
(Webpage) Clinical Trials Drug Importation Frequently Asked Questions (CAN-32) (Last Updated June 1, 2017)
Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada
(Webpage) ClinicalTrials.gov (CAN-45) (Current as of July 18, 2025)
US National Library of Medicine
(Webpage) Common Electronic Submissions Gateway (CAN-25) (Last Updated May 23, 2024)
Health Canada
(Webpage) Electronic Submissions Gateway Next Generation (ESG NextGen) (CAN-51) (Current as of July 17, 2025)
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) ESG NextGen Frequently Asked Questions (CAN-54) (Last Updated April 12, 2025)
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Filing of Clinical Trials Frequently Asked Questions (CAN-33) (Last Updated May 4, 2017)
Health Canada
(Webpage) Forms: Applications and Submissions for Drug Products (CAN-19) (Last Updated December 18, 2025)
Health Canada
(Webpage) Frequently Asked Questions - Common Electronic Submissions Gateway (CAN-28) (Last Updated January 17, 2020)
Health Canada
(Webpage) Health Portfolio (CAN-29) (Last Updated September 23, 2024)
Government of Canada
(Webpage) Health Products and Food Branch (CAN-16) (Last Updated March 21, 2025)
Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada
(Webpage) How Drugs are Reviewed in Canada (CAN-23) (Last Updated August 21, 2020)
Health Canada
(Webpage) How to Use the Common Electronic Submissions Gateway to Send Regulatory Transactions to Health Canada (CAN-34) (Last Updated May 23, 2024)
Health Canada
(Webpage) Instructions for Completing the Clinical Trial Site Information Form (CAN-30) (Last Updated June 15, 2022)
Health Canada
(Webpage) International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) – Guidelines (CAN-50) (Last Updated June 27, 2025)
Health Canada
(Webpage) International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) – Health Canada Role in ICH (CAN-10) (Last Updated February 15, 2022)
Health Canada
(Webpage) ISRCTN Registry (CAN-46) (Current as of July 18, 2025)
ISRCTN Registry
(Webpage) Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada (CAN-42) (Last Updated February 7, 2025)
Office of Privacy Commissioner of Canada
(Webpage) Panel on Research Ethics – Navigating the Ethics of Human Research (CAN-14) (Last Updated August 21, 2025)
Panel on Research Ethics, Government of Canada
(Webpage) Pharmaceutical Drugs Directorate (CAN-18) (Last Updated March 26, 2024)
Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada
(Webpage) Post-Authorization Requirements (CAN-22) (Last Updated October 3, 2017)
Health Canada
(Webpage) Provincial and Territorial Privacy Laws and Oversight (CAN-43) (Last Updated September 5, 2025)
Office of Privacy Commissioner of Canada
(Webpage) Public Health Agency of Canada – Licensing Program (CAN-24) (Last Updated January 11, 2024)
Public Health Agency of Canada
(Webpage) Regulatory Innovation for Health Products: Overview (CAN-41) (Last Updated December 16, 2022)
Health Canada
(Webpage) Research Ethics Board (REB 4: Health Research Ethics Board - Biomedical Panel) (CAN-1) (Current as of July 18, 2025)
University of Alberta
(Webpage) Research Ethics Board: Overview of the Health Canada and Public Health Agency of Canada REB (CAN-35) (Last Updated April 5, 2024)
Health Canada
(Webpage) Tools to Support Study Planning (CAN-11) (Current as of October 2, 2025)
Network of Networks (N2)
Forms
(Form) Dossier ID Request Form for Biologic Clinical Trial Dossiers (CAN-20) (Last Updated November 2, 2023)
Health Canada
(Form) Dossier ID Request Form for Pharmaceutical Clinical Trial Dossiers (CAN-21) (Last Updated November 2, 2023)
Health Canada
(Form) Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs) for Clinical Trials – Expedited Reporting Summary Form (CAN-5) (Date Unavailable)
Health Canada
(Form) Check list for Submitting Requested Development Safety Update Reports (DSUR) in Electronic Format (CAN-38) (Date Unavailable)
Health Canada
(Form) CIOMS Form I (CAN-7) (Date Unavailable)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(Form) Clinical Trial Site Information Form (CAN-6) (Ver.21.12.21) (Effective January 2, 2020)
Health Canada
(Form) Health Canada 3011: Drug Submission Application Form for Human, Veterinary or Disinfectant Drugs and Clinical Trial Application/Attestation (CAN-4) (Version 5.03) (Last Updated March 2, 2022)
Health Canada
(Form) Qualified Investigator Undertaking (CAN-37) (March 2, 2022)
Health Canada
(Form) Research Ethics Board Attestation (CAN-8) (March 2, 2022)
Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

China
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
This message was updated on January 13, 2026
Information Not Yet Incorporated Into Country Profile:

Planned Implementation of ICH E6(R3) Guideline

On December 22, 2025, the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) announced the application of the ICH Harmonised Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) to all drug clinical trials conducted after March 31, 2026. For more details, see the NMPA announcement.

Personal Information Protection Audit Requirements

The Cyberspace Administration of China published the Measures for the Administration of Compliance Audits on Personal Information Protection, which went into effect on May 1, 2025. The measures outline the requirements and processes for both self-initiated and regulator-requested compliance audit activities. Additionally, guidelines for conducting compliance audits are provided, which detail the personal information processing activities that must be audited.

Human Genetic Resources Management

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Clinical research in China is regulated and overseen by the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) (the Chinese name translates as “State Drug Administration”) and the National Health Commission (NHC).

National Medical Products Administration

As per the DRR, the NMPA-Org, the DAL, the RegImplemDAL, the RegImplemDAL-Amndt, the SC-Opinions-No44, the NMPA-No50-2018, and the NMPA-No230-2015, the NMPA is the regulatory authority responsible for national drug registration management, which includes regulation of clinical trials. Per the DRR, NMPA’s Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) is responsible for the evaluation of drug clinical trial applications, drug marketing authorization applications, supplementary applications, and overseas drug production registration applications. The NMPA grants permission for clinical trials to be conducted in China in accordance with the provisions of the DAL, the VaccineLaw, the DRR, the SC-Opinions-No44, the NMPA-No50-2018, and the NMPA-No230-2015. The drug category in which an applicant chooses to register determines the clinical trial application review and approval or filing process.

Per the SC-IRP and the SAMR-Org, China established the State Administration for Market Regulation (SAMR). The SAMR is a full ministry agency reporting directly to the State Council of the People's Republic of China. Under the SAMR is the NMPA, which regulates clinical trials.

As delineated in the NMPA-Org and CHN-78, the NMPA implements China’s guidelines, policies, and decision-making for the supervision and administration of drugs, medical devices, and cosmetics. It is responsible for safety supervision; standards management; drug registration; quality management; risk management; pharmacist licensing; inspection systems; international cooperation; guiding provincial and municipal drug administration; and other tasks assigned by the State Council and Party Central Committee. The NMPA is charged with accelerating the examination and approval of innovative drugs, establishing a system of listing license holders, promoting electronic review and approval, and improving efficiencies.

Per CHN-77, the following NMPA departments are involved with clinical trial application and drug registration:

Drug Registration Management Department – formulates, supervises, and implements drug standards (including clinical trial quality management), technical guidelines, and registration
Drug Administration Department – formulates and supervises the implementation of pharmaceutical production quality management standards for drugs, Chinese medicines, biological products, and special drugs (e.g., radioactive and toxic), and formulates and implements a drug adverse reaction monitoring and alert system
Per the DRR, the NMPA-No50-2018, and CHN-81, the NMPA includes the National Institutes for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC) and the CDE, which are directly involved in the clinical trial application and drug registration approval process. Other relevant institutes and organizations include the National Pharmacopoeia Commission, the Food and Drug Inspection Center, the Medical Device Technology Evaluation Center, the Administration Service Center, the Information Center, the Licensed Pharmacist Certification Center, the News and Publicity Center, and the International Exchange Center.

Further, the DRR delineates the responsibilities of the drug regulatory departments of provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities directly under the Central Government. With respect to clinical trials, they are responsible for organizing the daily supervision and investigation of institutions conducting drug clinical trials; participating in drug registration verification and inspection organized by the NMPA; and other matters entrusted by the NMPA.

The roles of the CDE and the NIFDC in the clinical trial application review and approval process are discussed further in the Scope of Assessment section.

National Health Commission

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the State Council’s NHC is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024). The NHC-HGRmgt states that the original application process and online platform (CHN-6) remain unchanged. As indicated in CHN-24, the NHC is responsible for formulating health policies and systems in China, including health services, hospitals, special populations, drugs, traditional Chinese medicines, and disease control and prevention. See CHN-24 for a comprehensive list of NHC responsibilities and functions. (Please note that the MgmtHumanGen was amended by SC-Order777 to reflect the transfer of HGR management from MOST to the NHC, but the Rules-MgmtHGR has not been amended yet to show the transfer.)

The MgmtHumanGen and the Rules-MgmtHGR stipulate that MOST’s (now the NHC’s) HGR responsibilities include employing experts in the fields of biotechnology, medicine, health, ethics, law, etc. to form an expert review committee to review and approve international cooperative research. The Rules-MgmtHGR indicates that MOST (now the NHC) should support the rational use of HGR to carry out scientific research, develop the biomedical industry, improve diagnosis and treatment techniques, strengthen management and oversight of HGR, improve approval services and efficiency, and advance the standardization of approvals and information disclosure. MOST (now the NHC) is responsible for national efforts such as the investigation, administrative licensing, supervision and inspection, and administrative punishments of HGR. Regarding administrative licensing, licenses must be obtained for the collection and preservation of Chinese HGR and for international collaborations in certain situations. As needed, MOST (now the NHC) entrusts relevant organizations to carry out formal reviews and technical reviews of application materials for administrative licensing of HGR, as well as efforts such as filing, prior reporting, supervision and inspection, and administrative punishments. The science and technology departments (committees and bureaus) of provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities directly under the Central Government, and the Science and Technology Bureau of the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps, are responsible for the management of the following HGR in their regions:

Oversight and inspection and routine management of HGR
Investigation and handling of illegal cases of HGR within the scope of their authority
As entrusted by MOST (now the NHC), carry out other efforts such as administrative licensing of HGR in their region
See Rules-MgmtHGR-Interp for a policy interpretation of the Rules-MgmtHGR.

Per HGR-WorkUpdt, the NHC’s China Biotechnology Development Center was entrusted to implement technical work related to the management of HGR. As described in CHN-4, the functions of the Center are:

Coordinate and supervise the implementation of the management of HGR
Examine and approve international cooperation projects involving HGR
Accept applications for the export of HGR, and handle exports and export certificates
Register and manage important genetic lineages and genetic resources in specific regions
Manage other work related to HGR
The Rules-MgmtHGR also state that applications must pass a security review organized by MOST (now the NHC) if the study’s provision or opening of HGR information to foreign entities may impact China’s public health, national security, or the social public interest. In addition, per the Bioscrty-Law, MOST (now the NHC) regulates biotechnology safety under the National Security Commission pursuant to a Coordination Mechanism for National Biosecurity (CMNB). The CMNB consists of the competent State Council departments for health, agriculture and rural affairs, science and technology, and foreign affairs, as well as relevant military agencies, to analyze national biosecurity issues, and organize, coordinate, and drive national biosecurity work. MOST (now the NHC) and the other agencies under CMNB establish safety monitoring/reporting requirements, an early warning system, and implementing regulations.

Regarding monitoring and protecting HGR, as delineated in MgmtHumanGen, NHC (formerly the MOST) is also authorized to strengthen the protection of HGR in China, which involves conducting surveys and implementing a declaration and registration system for important genetic families and human genetic resources in specific regions. MOST (now the NHC) will enforce the regulations and levy fines for illegal HGR activities which include:

Collecting HGR from important genetic families and specific regions in China without approval, or collecting HGR of the types and quantities specified by MOST (now the NHC) through special regulation
Preserving Chinese HGR without approval
Conducting international cooperative scientific research using Chinese HGR without approval
Failing to pass the security review that may affect China's public health, national security, and social public interest to foreign organizations, individuals, and institutions that they establish or actually control, and
Failing to file with MOST (now the NHC) the type, quantity, and use of the HGR in China before an international cooperative clinical trial begins
Other Considerations

Per CHN-59, China is a regulatory member of the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). CHN-49 summarizes the ICH guiding principles and provides Chinese translations, when available.

Please note: China is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (CHN-30), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see CHN-55.

Contact Information

National Medical Products Administration (NMPA)

Per CHN-31, the following is the NMPA’s contact information:

National Medical Products Administration
No. 1 Beiluyuan Zhanlan Road
Xicheng District
Beijing 100037
P.R. China

Per CDE-Reloctn, the following is CDE’s contact information:

National Medical Products Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation
Building 1-5
District 2, No. 22 Guangde Street
Beijing Economic and Technological Development Zone
Beijing, 100076
P.R. China

Phone number: 010-68585566

National Health Commission

Per HGR-WorkUpdt, HGR-AppGuide, and CHN-4, following is the contact information for NHC’s HGR consultation:

National Health Commission
China Biotechnology Development Center
Rooms 1022 and 1001, Building 4
No. 16 West Fourth Ring Middle Road
Haidian District
Beijing, 100036
P.R. China

Contact: Zhu Min
Phone number: 010-88225151 or 010-88225168
Information system support: 17610386080
Email: ycb@cncbd.org.cn

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Overview

National Medical Products Administration

In accordance with the DRR, the DAL, the NMPA-No50-2018, the SC-Opinions-No44, and the NMPA-No230-2015, the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) is responsible for reviewing and approving clinical trial applications for drugs to be registered in China, as required. The DRR clarifies that the NMPA regulates clinical trials for drugs in development that are ultimately seeking market approvals in China. Per the DAL and the DRR, and as explained in CHN-7, CHN-18, and CHN-1, China adopted a drug marketing authorization holders (MAHs) system across China. All entities or drug research institutions holding drug marketing authorizations must take responsibility for drug safety, effectiveness, and quality controllability in the whole process of drug research and development, production, distribution, and use. Based on this system, the MAHs are also named as applicants or sponsors during clinical trials. The scope of the NMPA’s assessment includes Phase I through Phase IV clinical trials and bioequivalence studies. As stated in the DRR, clinical trials of drugs must be reviewed and approved by an ethics committee (EC). The DRR indicates that EC review may be submitted in parallel to NMPA’s review, but the study cannot be initiated until after review and approval by the EC. The DRR emphasizes a risk-based approach to drug registration and clinical trial approvals, following the principles of openness, fairness, and justice. This is guided by demonstrating clinical value, encouraging research and creation of new drugs, and promoting the development of generic drugs.

As delineated in the DRR, the SC-Opinions-No44, and the NMPA-No51-2016, the drug classification in which an applicant chooses to register determines the clinical trial application review and approval process. Per the DRR, the registration of drugs must be classified and managed in accordance with three (3) broad categories of Chinese medicines, chemical medicines, and biological products. The NMPA-No44-2020 and CHN-1 delineate the classifications within the chemical medicine category as follows:

Class 1: Innovative drugs that have not been marketed in China or overseas (i.e., drugs that contain new compounds with clear structures and pharmacological effects, and have clinical values)
Class 2: Modified new drugs that have not been marketed in China or overseas (i.e., drugs that have their structure, dosage form, formulation, process, route of administration, and indications optimized on the basis of known active ingredients and have significant clinical advantages)
Class 3: Drugs manufactured by domestic applicants by imitating the original drugs that have been marketed overseas but not yet in China; such drugs must have the quality and efficacy consistent with the reference listed drug
Class 4: Drugs manufactured by domestic applicants by imitating the original drugs that have been marketed in China; such drugs must have the quality and efficacy consistent with the reference formulations
Class 5: Drugs that have been marketed overseas and are under application for being marketed in China
As per NMPA-No21-2021, the NMPA provides additional technical support to expedite the review and approval process of domestically unlisted drugs that have been listed overseas in the above Classes 3 and 5.

Per the DRR, the registration of biological products is classified according to innovative biological products, new medicines of improved biological products, and already listed biological products (including biological similar drugs). As delineated in the NMPA-No43-2020, biological products refer to preparations that use microorganisms, cells, animal or human-derived tissues, and bodily fluids as starting materials, and are made with biological technology for the prevention, treatment, and diagnosis of human diseases. In order to standardize the registration and management of biological products, biological products are divided into preventive biological products, therapeutic biological products, and in vitro diagnostic reagents managed by biological products. Preventive biological products refer to vaccine-like biological products used for human immunization to prevent and control the occurrence and prevalence of diseases, including immunization program vaccines and non-immunization program vaccines. Therapeutic biological products refer to biological products used in the treatment of human diseases, such as proteins, polypeptides and their derivatives prepared from engineered cells (such as bacteria, yeast, insect, plant, and mammalian cells) with different expression systems; cell therapy and gene therapy products; allergen products; microecological products; biologically active products extracted from human or animal tissues or bodily fluids or prepared by fermentation, etc. The following are descriptions of biological product classifications for both preventive and therapeutic uses:

Class 1: Innovative vaccines that have not been marketed at home or abroad
Class 2: Improved vaccines that improve the safety, effectiveness, and quality controllability of new products by improving the domestic or overseas marketed vaccine products, and have obvious advantages
Class 3: Vaccines that have been marketed at home or abroad
Per the VaccineLaw, the NMPA must approve vaccine clinical trials. The NMPA-No32-2019 explains that the VaccineLaw strengthens the supervision and enforcement of vaccines and deepens the reform of the drug review and approval system. This includes strengthening the management of vaccine clinical trial institutions and investigating and punishing illegal activities related to applying for vaccine clinical trials (e.g., false data).

National Health Commission

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024. SC-Order777 amends the MgmtHumanGen to reflect the transfer of HGR management from MOST to NHC, but the Bioscrty-Law and the Rules-MgmtHGR have not been amended yet to show the transfer). Per the Bioscrty-Law and the MgmtHumanGen, MOST’s (now the NHC’s) scope of assessment is the collection, preservation, utilization, and external provision of HGR to ensure these activities:

Do not endanger the public health, national security, and social public interests of China
Are in accordance with ethics principles and reviews per relevant regulations
Respect the privacy rights of HGR donors, obtain their prior informed consent, and protect their legitimate rights and interests, and
Comply with the technical norms formulated by MOST (now the NHC)
See the Rules-MgmtHGR for the prescribed conditions when MOST (now the NHC) licenses must be obtained for the collection of Chinese HGR.

As delineated in the Rules-MgmtHGR, MOST (NHC) licenses must be obtained for the preservation of HGR, which involves storing HGR with legal sources under appropriate environmental conditions, ensuring their quality and safety, and using them for future scientific research, excluding temporary storage for teaching purposes. If the preservation also involves the collection of HGR, applicants only need to apply for an administrative license for the preservation of HGR, and do not need to separately apply for a collection license. Next, the Rules-MgmtHGR require administrative licenses for international scientific research cooperation that use and export HGR. If there is no export, only prior filing/notification with MOST (now the NHC) is required before initiating the international research cooperation.

Per the Rules-MgmtHGR, where multicenter clinical research is carried out, the sponsor or the primary site/unit (either the Chinese unit or a foreign party unit) may apply for administrative licensing or filing after the primary site/unit passes the ethics review. After the sponsor or primary site/unit obtains the administrative license or completes the filing, the medical and health institution(s) participating in the clinical research must submit the ethics review approval document of their site/unit, or the certification materials for the ethics review approval provided by the primary site/unit, along with the letter of commitment issued by the site/unit, to MOST (now the NHC). Following those submissions, the international cooperative clinical research can be carried out.

As delineated in the HGR-AppGuide, the scope of the administrative license for the collection of HGR applies to the following activities to be carried out within the territory of China:

HGR collection activities for important genetic pedigrees – applies to blood-related groups with genetic diseases and/or with special hereditary physical or physiological characteristics, as well as the members of the group with genetic diseases and/or special hereditary physical or physiological characteristics involving three (3) generations or more.
HGR collection activities in specific areas – applies to HGR from populations who have lived in isolation or special environments for a long time and have special physical characteristics or adaptive traits in physiological characteristics. Specific areas are not divided based on whether they are ethnic minority concentrated areas.
HGR collection activities for large-scale population research with a population of more than 3,000 – includes but is not limited to cohort studies, cross-sectional studies, clinical studies, and constitutional studies.
Clinical Trial Review Process

National Medical Products Administration

As delineated in the DRR, the NMPA is the regulatory authority responsible for national drug registration management, which includes management of clinical trial applications. The NMPA’s Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) is responsible for evaluating drug clinical trial applications, drug marketing authorization applications, supplementary applications, and re-registration applications for drugs produced overseas. The DRR states that applicants may communicate with major technical institutions including the CDE at key stages, such as before submitting a drug clinical trial application.

Communications and Pre-Application Protocol Review

Per the NMPA-No50-2018, the NMPA-No48-2020, and the NMPA-No51-2023, with regard to chemical drugs and biological products, the applicant must first request a communication meeting with the CDE to determine the integrity of the clinical trial application data and the feasibility of conducting the clinical trial. The NMPA-No51-2023 reaffirms the required communications between the applicant and the CDE and review of the clinical trial protocol before submitting the clinical trial application. The CDE conducts a preliminary review of the information provided by the applicant according to relevant requirements. The review team reviews the science, completeness, operability, and risk controllability of the clinical trial protocol, focusing on the basis for the research, safety, and whether the risk management measures of the drug support the conduct of clinical trials. In addition to clearly responding to the specific questions raised by the applicant, the submitted clinical trial protocol is reviewed to ensure participant protection. For confirmatory, or critical clinical trials, CDE must also evaluate the suitability of the target population, the science of the dosage and cycle and the primary endpoint indicators, the acceptability of statistical assumptions, the rationality of sample size estimation, the operability of the risk management plan, and the benefit/risk assessment elements. CDE’s review team communicates its findings by holding a meeting (face-to-face or online) or by giving a written reply and must provide the applicant with the minutes of the communication meeting or the written reply. See NMPA-No51-2023 for additional details on the pre-application communications and protocol review.

Clinical Trial Application Review

Per the NMPA-No50-2018, the NMPA’s Drug Registration Management Department is responsible for conducting administrative reviews of clinical trial applications, and then forwarding the submissions to the CDE for technical review. (Deviations from this general process are described further below in this section.) The DRR states that after completing the pharmacology, toxicology, and other studies supporting the clinical trials of the drug, the applicant must submit relevant research materials in accordance with the application requirements (See Submission Process and Submission Content sections for details). If the application materials meet the screening requirements, NMPA’s pharmaceutical, medical, and other technical personnel review the clinical trial applications for drugs.

Per the DRR, when reviewing the application, the CDE will conduct an associated review of the chemical raw materials, auxiliary materials, and packaging materials and containers used in direct contact with the pharmaceutical preparations. The CDE makes a risk-based decision on whether to initiate an on-site inspection based on the registered varieties, processes, facilities, and previous acceptance verification. For innovative drugs, improved new drugs, and biological products, on-site verification of drug registration manufacturing and inspection of pre-market drug manufacturing quality management must be conducted. If manufacturing verification is required, the applicant and the drug regulatory department of the province, autonomous region, or municipality directly under the Central Government where the applicant or manufacturer is located will be informed. The National Institutes for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC) (also referred to as the Procuratorate), or the drug inspection agency designated by the NMPA, will conduct the inspections and testing, as needed. The drug registration inspection of overseas-produced drugs must be implemented by the port drug inspection agency.

The NMPA-No51-2023 specifies that the CDE review team must evaluate the science, completeness, operability, and risk controllability of the clinical trial protocol in the application. If necessary, an expert consultation meeting may be held. For clinical trials that are approved after review, the technical review team’s conclusion and associated "Clinical Trial Approval Notice" must clearly state the indications, clinical trial protocol title, number, version number, version date, etc. The review team’s conclusion and notice may propose revisions or suggestions to the clinical trial protocol if necessary. For clinical trial protocols that require revisions, CDE will notify the applicant through a professional inquiry letter, clearly informing the applicant of the problems and revision opinions in the current protocol. The applicant must submit a revised clinical trial protocol within five (5) days, following the guidance in the Prcdrs-Changes. For clinical trial protocols that are deemed unfeasible, have participant safety risks, or other serious defects, and the applicant cannot revise and improve them within the time limit specified in the inquiry letter, the clinical trial application will not be approved. In the review team’s conclusion and the "Notice of Disapproval of Drug Clinical Trials", the applicant should be clearly informed of the reasons for the disapproval.

The NMPA-No51-2023 also states that before conducting subsequent phased drug exploratory clinical trials, a corresponding drug clinical trial protocol must be reviewed and approved by the EC. After completing exploratory clinical trials and before conducting confirmatory (or critical) clinical trials, an application for a communication meeting must be submitted to the CDE to evaluate the subsequent clinical trial protocol (if applicable).

With regard to vaccine clinical trials, the VaccineLaw indicates that the NMPA will review the clinical trial plan, the safety monitoring and evaluation system, the selection of participants, and whether there are effective measures according to the degree of risk to protect the legal rights of the participants. Vaccine clinical trials can only be carried out or organized by a tertiary medical institution that meets the conditions prescribed by the NMPA and the health and safety department of the State Council, or a disease prevention and control institution at or above the provincial level.

Per the DRR, the DAL, the NMPA-No50-2018, and CHN-14, a clinical trial application will be considered approved after 60 working days if the applicant does not receive a rejection or an inquiry for clarification from the NMPA. As specified in the DRR, drug clinical trials must be carried out within three (3) years after approval. If the drug clinical trial application is approved and no participant signs an informed consent form within three (3) years from the date of approval, the approval lapses. If it is still necessary to carry out the drug clinical trial, the applicant must re-apply. Upon approval/registration of the drug, the applicant receives a drug registration certificate, which is valid for five (5) years. An application for drug re-registration must be submitted six (6) months before the validity period expires.

The DRR states that to amend content in the original drug registration approval, the applicant must conduct sufficient research and verification on the change of the drug and fully evaluate the possible impact of the change on the drug. Data on the impact of safety, efficacy, and quality control must be submitted with the application for amendment. The NMPA-No51-2023 indicates that when changes to a clinical trial protocol are needed, the sponsor may first conduct a self-assessment of the changes in accordance with the relevant requirements of the DRR and the NMPA-No34-2022, and implement further work based on the results of the self-assessment. For substantial changes, the sponsor must submit materials in accordance with the relevant requirements of the NMPA-No34-2022. The CDE review team must review the supplementary application and notify the applicant of whether any/all of the proposed changes are approved. For changes that are not approved, CDE must clearly state the reasons. See NMPA-No51-2023 for definitions of substantial and non-substantial changes to a protocol. Also see Prcdrs-Changes for working procedures for other changes during the review of the clinical trial application.

Expedited Clinical Trial Review

The DRR authorizes regulatory pathways for priority review and approval (including for breakthrough therapeutic drugs), conditional approval, and special approval procedures. As per the SC-Opinions-No44, the NMPA-No230-2015, and the NMPA-No51-2016, a new drug classification system, priority review for innovative drugs and those deemed to have an urgent clinical need, and other changes help China to be more innovative and expedite reviews. With regard to priority review, per the NMPA-No230-2015 and the DRR, the NMPA may apply expedited review and approval procedures to applications for urgently needed drugs and vaccines that are intended to treat certain illnesses or patient populations (e.g., children or elderly people) that the State Council or the NMPA consider to be clinically in demand. The DRR expanded priority review to breakthrough therapeutic drugs, which are used to prevent and treat diseases with the following conditions: are seriously life threatening or seriously affect the quality of life, there are no effective prevention or treatment methods, and there is sufficient evidence to show that they have obvious clinical advantages. Applicants must apply to the CDE at the critical stage of the drug clinical trial. See CHN-69 for handling guidelines on priority review and approval.

The NMPA-No21-2024 describes NMPA’s pilot work plan for optimizing the review and approval of clinical trials for innovative drugs. This initiative aims to review and approve innovative drug clinical trial applications within 30 business days (a reduction from the 60 days as described above in the normal procedures). Pilot projects will be carried out in provinces (autonomous regions and municipalities) that meet the conditions laid out in NMPA-No21-2024. The scope of the pilot project is clinical trial applications for Class 1 innovative drugs (excluding cell and gene therapy products, vaccine products, etc.). Applicants are not subject to regional restrictions and must have at least three (3) innovative drug clinical trial applications approved at home and abroad, have extensive experience in clinical trial implementation and pharmacovigilance management, and be able to conduct a comprehensive risk assessment of clinical trial projects and develop an effective risk management plan before submitting a clinical trial application. In principle, the pilot institution must be a national medical center or national clinical medical research center in the pilot area and must have established a work system to provide clinical trial project establishment, ethics review, and contract review services before the applicant submits a new drug clinical trial application. See NMPA-No21-2024 for additional requirements on application submission and applicant and institutional eligibility. The applicant must initiate the clinical trial within 12 weeks after the approval of the clinical trial application. The pilot work will last for one (1) year and the experience of the pilot work will be summarized in July 2025. One (1) pilot project has been approved in Beijing and Shanghai as indicated in NMPA-No55-2024.

According to the NMPA-No82-2020, the NMPA establishes working procedures for the review of breakthrough therapy drugs, conditional approval of drug marketing priority review, and approval of drug marketing authorization. Sponsors can apply for expedited status for breakthrough therapeutic drugs in Phase I and II clinical trials—usually no later than before the commencement of Phase III clinical trials. Breakthrough drug procedures are designed to be used during clinical trials of drugs to prevent and treat patients with conditions that may be severely life-threatening or that may severely affect their quality of life. There are also no existing effective prevention and treatment methods nor is there sufficient evidence to show that the investigational drugs being tested have obvious clinical advantages compared with existing treatment methods. Also see CondtlAppl-Drugs for technical guidelines on the conditional approval of drugs for marketing.

Per the NMPA-No79-2018, the NMPA established a special review channel for urgently needed drugs that were already on the market in the United States, Europe, and Japan since 2008. Applicants may apply for a drug listing and proceed to conduct the clinical trials while the CDE conducts a technical review of the application materials.

The DRR also authorizes the CDE to conditionally approve breakthrough therapeutic drugs for marketing during clinical trials and vaccines that are urgently needed for major public health emergencies and the benefits outweigh the risks. The applicant must communicate to the CDE on the conditions for marketing with conditional approval and the research work to be completed after marketing, and submit an application for drug marketing approval after communication and confirmation. For the conditionally approved drugs and vaccines, risk management measures must be implemented after the drug is marketed, and the drug clinical trial must be completed within the prescribed time limit. Finally, the DRR authorizes the NMPA to implement special approval procedures for drugs required for public health emergencies. The circumstances, procedures, time limits, and requirements for special approval, will be subject to the NMPA’s procedures for specific approval of drugs.

For background on China’s reformation of the review and approval system to encourage innovation of drugs, see the SC-Opinions-No42. China’s regulatory pathways for expedited approvals and other reforms to the clinical trial submission and review process are described in the Submission Process and Submission Content sections. NMPA-No52-2018-Interp describes the requirements for clinical trial and drug registration applications using trial data generated entirely overseas, as well as data generated from simultaneous research occurring in China and abroad. CHN-11 also provides useful information on the NMPA’s overall clinical trial application review and approval process.

Overseas Data and Waiving Local Clinical Trials

The NMPA-No35-2017 and interpretations in NMPA-No52-2018-Interp describe requirements for clinical trial and drug registration applications to the NMPA using trial data generated entirely overseas, as well as data generated from simultaneous research occurring in China and abroad. With regard to the latter, researchers can conduct Phase I of multi-regional clinical trials (MRCT) of imported investigational new drugs and therapeutic biological products (excluding vaccines) simultaneously in China.

As per NMPA-No52-2018, clinical trial and drug registration applications for imported new drugs or therapeutic biological products using trial data generated entirely overseas do not need to be registered first in their own country in order to enter China. Overseas clinical trial data is acceptable for direct China registration provided that:

The data is reliable, authenticated, and complies with the requirements of the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37)
The data can assess the efficacy and safety for the target indication
There are no ethnic sensitivities to Chinese local populations influencing efficacy and safety
The data meets China’s drug registration requirements
See the NMPA-No52-2018 for additional details on the review and approval of overseas clinical trial data. For overseas clinical trial data completed before the enactment of NMPA-No35-2017, the NMPA will consider exemption from conducting local clinical trials, with the condition that the applications meet all other Chinese drug regulatory requirements.

For a running list (in reverse chronological order) of NMPA guidance on drug regulatory requirements, please refer to CHN-60.

National Health Commission

The MgmtHumanGen and the Bioscrty-Law prohibit foreign entities or individuals from collecting or preserving Chinese HGR in China, or providing Chinese HGR for use abroad, except under prescribed conditions to carry out scientific research activities, which must be conducted through collaboration with Chinese scientific research institutions, higher education institutions, medical institutions, or enterprises. Per the MgmtHumanGen and the Rules-MgmtHGR, the foreign entity and the Chinese entity must jointly file an application for approval to MOST (now the NHC), and the research must pass an ethics review in the countries (regions) where the partners are located. The only exception to the approval requirement is international collaborations in clinical trials that do not involve the export of Chinese HGR materials such as organs, tissues, or cells comprising the human genome, genes, or other genetic substances. Such clinical trial collaborations, however, must be filed with MOST (now the NHC) on its online platform (CHN-6), which will generate a record number. See HGR-InfoSys for background on CHN-6. Per HGR-InfoSys, for help with the online platform, contact Zhu Min with the NHC’s China Biotechnology Development Center at 010-88225151 or 010-88225168; or the information system support at 17610386080.

Per the HGR-AppGuide, following administrative screening, the NHC will confirm receipt through CHN-6 and organize a technical review. NHC must conduct its review and issue a decision within 20 working days. If the application is approved, NHC notifies the applicant of the approval through CHN-6 and a letter. If there are missing materials, NHC gives the applicant a one-time opportunity to correct the application and resubmit. If the application exceeds the scope of the license, NHC informs the applicant that the application is not approved.

The Bioscrty-Law prohibits engaging in biotechnology research, development, and application activities that endanger public health, damage biological resources, or destroy ecosystems and biodiversity. Units engaged in biotechnology clinical trials must be responsible for the safety of their biotechnology research, development, and application; adopt biosafety risk prevention and control measures; and formulate biosafety training, follow-up inspections, regular reports, etc. China is implementing a classified management system for biotechnology research and development activities into three (3) categories: high-risk, medium-risk, and low-risk. The risk classification standards are to be formulated, adjusted, and announced by the competent State Council departments for science and technology (now the NHC), health, agriculture, and rural areas. High-risk and medium-risk biotechnology research and development activities must include risk assessments and risk prevention/control and emergency plans for biosafety incidents. The Rules-MgmtHGR also states that clinical trial applications must pass a security review organized by MOST (now the NHC) if the study’s provision or opening of HGR information to foreign entities may impact China’s public health, national security, or the social public interest.

For additional details, see the HGR-FAQs for frequently asked questions on HGR applications. Also see the Submission Process and Submission Content sections and the Specimens topic for additional information on HGR regulatory management.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
National Medical Products Administration

In accordance with the DRR, the applicant is required to pay a fee after the drug registration is approved by the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA). As per the NMPA-No75-2020 and CHN-14, the NMPA charges the following drug registration fees to review and approve clinical trials as part of the drug registration process (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

New drugs made in China: 192,000 Yuan
New drugs made outside China: 376,000 Yuan
Generic drugs made in China: 318,000 Yuan
Generic drugs made outside China: 502,000 Yuan
One-time import of drugs: 2,000 Yuan
As specified in NMPA-No75-2020 and CHN-14, the fees are based on one (1) active pharmaceutical ingredient or one (1) preparation as one (1) variety. If another specification is added, the registration fee will be increased by 20% according to the corresponding category.

For further guidance on fees associated with submitting supplementary applications and registering renewals for imported drugs and more, please refer to NMPA-No75-2020.

Payment Instructions

NMPA-No37-2022 indicates that to register a drug, the applicant should submit the drug registration application to NMPA’s Government Service Portal (CHN-71). The relevant center will conduct an administrative review. Next, the non-tax income collection management system of the Ministry of Finance will send an electronic payment code to the applicant in the form of a text message. The applicant can pay through the counter payment, self-service terminal, online payment, self-service POS card, bank exchange, or transfer and payment. The applicant will receive confirmation of electronic payment via email within 10 working days. Electronic payment documents have the same legal effect as paper instruments.

National Health Commission

Per HGR-AppGuide, the National Health Commission (NHC) does not charge a fee for an application for a human genetic resources (HGR) license in China.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Overview

As per the Measures-Ethics, the RegEthics, the EC-Guide, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the DRR, and the DAL, an ethics committee (EC) must approve a clinical trial application prior to a sponsor initiating a clinical trial. Per the NMPA-NHC-No101-2019, each institution that conducts biomedical research is required to have an EC that is responsible for reviewing the scientific and ethical rationality of drug clinical trial programs, reviewing and supervising the qualifications of drug clinical trial researchers, supervising the development of drug clinical trials, and ensuring the ethics review process is independent, objective, and fair. Per the Measures-Ethics, institutions conducting life sciences and medical research involving people must establish ECs to carry out ethics reviews of such research. When the institution does not establish an EC, or the EC is unable to meet the needs of the review, the institution may entrust another institutional EC or a regional EC and implement extended supervision through follow-up reviews.

As described in the EC-Guide, China’s ethics review landscape comprises ethics expert committees and institutional ECs. Ethics expert committees are divided into the National Medical Ethics Expert Committee and provincial medical ethics expert committees. They are mainly responsible for guidance, consultation, and training, and generally do not undertake specific ethics review tasks. Institutional ECs are established by medical and health institutions in accordance with relevant requirements, and are mainly responsible for ethics review, training, and consultation in their institutions. Per the Measures-Ethics, provincial-level health departments establish and manage regional ECs. The EC-Guide states that the regional ECs and institutional ECs have the same status and are subject to the same requirements. ECs at different levels and in different institutions should strictly perform their respective duties, carry out effective communication and collaboration, adhere to the independence, impartiality, and objectivity of ethics review, and ensure that all medical research complies with ethical standards and requirements to fully protect the safety and rights of research participants. Following are brief overviews of each type of EC:

The National Medical Ethics Expert Committee formulates standards for the construction of institutional ECs and ethics review guidelines, including review content, review procedures, additional protection for special groups, and review time limits; publishes ethics review requirements for high-risk activities in scientific and technological ethics; and formulates standard requirements for ethics review application materials.
The provincial medical ethics expert committees promote the implementation of the above-mentioned ethics review standards and operating guidelines within the administrative region, promotes the construction and operation of the institutional ECs in the region, and standardizes the work of ethics review. The provincial medical ethics expert committees can make supplementary adjustments to the above-mentioned ethics review standards and operating guidelines in light of the cultural customs of the region.
The institutional EC establishes and improves the ethics review work system and operating procedures in accordance with the guidance of the national and the provincial medical ethics expert committees, improves the conflict of interest management and quality control mechanisms, and ensures that the ethics review process is independent, objective, and fair. ECs at different levels and in different institutions should strictly perform their respective duties, which includes conducting and ensuring ethics reviews that protect the safety and rights of research participants.
Note that per the Measures-Ethics-Interp, the main framework and provisions of the Measures-Ethics and the RegEthics are generally consistent and both regulations should be followed. Some provisions in the newer Measures-Ethics have been refined and improved in combination with the requirements of new laws and regulations and the actual conditions of colleges, universities, and research institutes. The RegEthics will be reviewed and revised to closely align with the Measures-Ethics. (ClinRegs will monitor and update the China profile, as needed.)

Ethics Committee Composition

Pursuant to the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the EC composition must meet health authority requirements, and include members of various categories with different gender compositions. The EC members must be trained in ethics review and be able to review ethical and scientific issues related to clinical trials.

Per the Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, and the RegEthics, ECs should have at least seven (7) members. The EC-Guide and the RegEthics state that the ECs should be composed of multidisciplinary specialists in biomedicine, management, ethics, law, sociology, statistics, and other areas that collectively represent the qualifications and experience to provide a fair scientific and ethics review. The RegEthics states that in areas where minority ethnic groups reside, the institution should consider including members of those groups on the EC. The EC-Guide indicates that there should be one (1) member who does not belong to the institution and has no close relationship with the project researchers (the same member can meet both requirements). As delineated in the Measures-Ethics, EC members must be selected from experts in the fields of life sciences, medicine, bioethics, law, and people from outside the institution, and there must be members of different sexes. Ethnic minority members must be considered in ethnic minority areas. EC members must have the corresponding ethics review capabilities, and regularly receive training on ethical knowledge of life sciences and medical research and knowledge of relevant laws and regulations.

The Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, and the RegEthics provide that the EC can hire an independent consultant if necessary. The Measures-Ethics and the RegEthics state that the independent consultant advises on specific project issues under review and does not participate in the voting. The EC-Guide further indicates that there should be clear institutional regulations on the qualifications, hiring procedures, and job responsibilities of independent consultants, and the hiring process of independent consultants should be recorded and filed.

The EC-Guide and the RegEthics provide that the EC composition should include a chairperson and vice chairpersons, who are elected by committee members. The number of vice chairpersons is not specified in the guidelines. When the chairperson is absent, the deputy chair performs the chairperson’s duties. ECs should not accept any research project applications that do not comply with national laws and regulations. In addition, the EC should refuse to review any projects in which they have a conflict of interest. See the EC-Guide for additional guidance on managing ECs.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

As per the Measures-Ethics, the RegEthics, the EC-Guide, and the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, each institution must have written SOPs, including a process to be followed for conducting reviews. To ensure the independence, objectivity, and impartiality of the ethics review process, the Measures-Ethics stipulates that the SOPs must include conflict of interest management and quality control mechanisms. Further, the EC must formulate an ethics review system in emergency situations (e.g., epidemic outbreaks) and clarify the time limit for review.

Per the Measures-Ethics, scientific research managers and other relevant personnel must conduct bioethics education and training. The EC-Guide specifies that all committee members should undergo basic professional training in scientific research ethics before starting their EC service at a provincial or above-level scientific research course and receive an ethics training certificate. Participation in continuing education should be on a continuous basis to ensure improvement.

As delineated in the Measures-Ethics, the term of office for members of ECs that review life sciences and medical research involving people must not exceed one (1) year, and they may be re-elected. The EC must have one (1) chairman and several vice chairmen, who must be elected by EC members through consultation and then appointed by the institution. EC members, independent consultants, and their staff must sign confidentiality agreements on sensitive information learned during ethics review work. The EC must accept the supervision of the institution's management. The EC may decide to approve, disapprove, approve after revision, re-examine after revision, continue research, suspend, or terminate the research under review, and must explain its reasons. The decision must be approved by more than one-half of all members of the EC. Members must vote after full discussion of the ethical issues involved in the study, and opinions inconsistent with the review decision must be recorded in detail.

The RegEthics states that EC members should agree to disclose their names, occupations, and affiliations, and to sign the reviews, confidentiality agreements, and a conflict of interest declaration. Each EC member term is five (5) years, after which they can be reappointed. Each institution that establishes an EC should also provide financial compensation to its committee members. EC review and approval decisions must take place during formal meetings. The majority of the total EC membership should be present to conduct reviews.

In addition, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 requires the EC to establish and implement the following written documents:

Provisions on the composition, establishment, and filing of the EC
The meeting schedule, meeting notice, and meeting review process sequence
The initial review and follow-up review procedures of the EC
A rapid review and approval procedure for minor amendments to the experimental protocol agreed to by the EC
Procedures for promptly notifying researchers of review opinions
Procedures for appealing ethics review opinions
The RegEthics and the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 state that written records of all meetings and resolutions should be preserved for five (5) years following the completion of a clinical trial.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Overview

According to the EC-Guide, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, and the NMPA-No11-2017, the primary scope of information assessed by the ethics committee (EC) relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial, in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Declaration of Helsinki (CHN-84). Per the Measures-Ethics and the RegEthics, ethics reviews and relevant personnel must comply with the Constitution of the People's Republic of China and Chinese laws and regulations. The Measures-Ethics indicates that life science and medical research involving humans must respect research participants and follow the principles of beneficence, non-harm, and fairness, and protect privacy and personal information. Per the RegEthics and the EC-Guide, the EC must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable (See the Vulnerable Populations section for additional information about these populations). In addition, the EC is responsible for ensuring a competent review of all ethical aspects of the clinical trial protocol; evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants; confirming the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, and methods; and verifying the adequacy of confidentiality safeguards.

Per Measures-Ethics, life science and medical research involving humans is defined as research activities using biological samples and information data (including health records and behaviors) of research participants, specifically including the following:

Activities that use methods such as physics, chemistry, biology, and traditional Chinese medicine to conduct research on human reproduction, growth, development, aging, etc.
Activities that use methods such as physics, chemistry, biology, traditional Chinese medicine, psychology, and other methods to conduct research on human physiology, psychological behavior, pathological phenomena, disease etiology and pathogenesis, as well as disease prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation
Activities using new technologies or products to conduct experimental research on the human body
Activities that use methods such as epidemiology, sociology, and psychology to collect, record, use, report, or store biological samples, information data, and other scientific research materials (including health records, behaviors, etc.) related to life sciences and medical issues
The GeneEdit-Ethics states that human genome editing research should have important scientific and social value, and should be limited to medical interventions for treatment or prevention. Non-medical genomic changes to research participants are prohibited. Researchers and institutions should follow the GeneEdit-Ethics for principles and ethical behavior to guide human genome editing research.

Note that per the Measures-Ethics-Interp, the main framework and provisions of the Measures-Ethics and the RegEthics are generally consistent and both regulations should be followed. Some provisions in the newer Measures-Ethics have been refined and improved in combination with the requirements of new laws and regulations and the actual conditions of colleges, universities, and research institutes. The RegEthics will be reviewed and revised to closely align with the Measures-Ethics. (ClinRegs will monitor and update the China profile, as needed.)

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

As per the RegEthics, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the DRR, the DAL, and the SC-Opinions-No42, the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) and the EC must approve a clinical trial application prior to a sponsor initiating a clinical trial. As stated in the DRR, clinical trials of drugs must be reviewed and approved by an EC. The DRR indicates that the EC review may be submitted in parallel to the NMPA’s review, but the study cannot be initiated until after review and approval by the EC. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the RegEthics also state that the EC must review and approve any protocol amendments prior to those changes being implemented.

Per the Rules-MgmtHGR, the collection, preservation, use, and external provision of China’s human genetic resources (HGR) must comply with ethical principles and pass the ethics review of ECs that have been registered with the relevant management departments. Further, applications for administrative licenses for international scientific research cooperation on HGR must pass an ethics review in the respective countries (regions) where both parties are located. Where the foreign party is truly unable to provide the ethics review certification materials of the country (region) where it is located, it may submit the proof that the foreign party unit recognizes the ethics review opinions of the Chinese unit.

The Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, and the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 provide that the EC’s scope of review must include the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Whether the institutions and researchers are competent; the qualifications and experience of the investigator meet clinical research requirements
Whether the research plan meets the required scientific and ethical principles, has scientific and social value, does not violate the provisions of laws and regulations, and does not harm the public interest
The degree of risk compared to the expected study benefit
The informed consent process and whether the relevant information provided is complete and easy to understand, and whether the method for obtaining consent was appropriate
Whether confidentiality measures have been taken to protect the participants’ privacy, personal information, and data
Whether the guidelines for the selection and exclusion of participants are appropriate and fair
Whether the participants are clearly informed of their rights in the research, including the right to equal treatment and that they can withdraw from the research at any time without reason and not be treated unfairly because of this
Whether the participant received reasonable compensation for participating in the research, and in case of damage or death, whether the treatment and compensation measures are appropriate; participants must not be charged research-related fees for participating in the research
Whether there is a designated contact for handling and obtaining informed consent and answering questions related to participant safety
Whether appropriate measures are taken to minimize participant risks
Potential conflicts of interest
When conducting non-therapeutic clinical trials, if the participants’ informed consent is implemented by their guardians instead, whether the trial protocol gives full consideration to the corresponding ethical issues, laws, and regulations
Whether the corresponding ethical issues, laws, and regulations are fully considered in the trial plan if the trial protocol clearly states that the participants or their guardians cannot sign an informed consent form (ICF) before the trial in an emergency
Whether participants are forced or induced to participate in clinical trials due to improper influence, including whether the ICF has content that waives legal rights or exempts researchers, institutions, or sponsors from being responsible
Whether the method, content, and timing of the release of research results are reasonable
Per the Measures-Ethics and the EC-Guide, the EC will make one (1) of the following decisions (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Approval: The EC unconditionally approves an initial review of the research protocol and will conduct follow-up reviews. The research can start immediately after approval.
Approval after modification: The EC conditionally approves a research protocol if the research leader accepts the EC’s proposed amendments.
Review after modification: If the EC needs more substantive information about the research project under review, it will decide to suspend the deliberation until the committee receives new information.
Approve continuation of research.
Not approved: The EC votes against a research proposal. The reasons for disapproval must be communicated to the research leader, who is given an opportunity to defend the research.
Suspension or termination of research: The EC suspends or terminates a research project.
The Measures-Ethics specifies that the EC must conduct the review and issue its opinion within 30 days of acceptance of the materials.

The Measures-Ethics states that before the implementation of research approved by the EC, researchers, ECs, and institutions must truthfully, completely, and accurately upload information to the registration platform (CHN-53), including research, ethics review opinions, and institutional review opinions in accordance with the requirements of the national medical research registration and filing information system, and promptly update the information according to the progress of the research. Researchers, ECs, and institutions are encouraged to upload information in real time during the study management process.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 specifies that the EC must pay attention to and clearly require investigators to report in a timely manner the following: deviations or modifications to the trial protocol to eliminate emergency hazards to participants; changes that increase the risk to participants or significantly affect the implementation of clinical trials; all suspicious and unexpected serious adverse reactions; and new information that may adversely affect the safety of participants or the implementation of clinical trials. The EC has the right to suspend or terminate clinical trials, as needed. Finally, the EC must accept and properly handle requests from participants. Per the EC-Guide, if there are accidental injuries or violations during the research project, the EC has the right to request the suspension or termination of an approved research project. Further, the EC reviews amendments to the protocol and informed consent form, and reviews serious adverse events and violations of the protocol. The Measures-Ethics states that when a serious adverse event is reported, the EC must conduct a timely review to determine whether the measures taken by researchers to protect the personal safety and health rights and interests of research participants are adequate, reassess the risk-benefit ratio of the research, and issue review opinions.

As delineated in the NMPA-No34-2022, protocol changes that result in updating the investigator’s brochure, ICF, or other relevant documents should be reported to the EC by the sponsor. The Measures-Ethics indicates that if approved research requires revision of the research plan, informed consent, recruitment materials, or other materials provided to research participants, the researcher must submit the revised documents to the EC for review. Further, the EC must conduct follow-up reviews at least annually in accordance with relevant reports submitted by the investigators. The follow-up review must include the following considerations:

Whether the research is conducted in accordance with the approved research plan and reported in a timely manner
Whether the research content was changed without authorization during the research process
Whether changes or new information increase the risk to research participants or significantly affect the implementation of the research
Whether it is necessary to suspend or terminate the research early
Other content that needs to be reviewed
Per the EC-Guide, the EC has the right to request regular follow-up reviews of approved research projects based on the possibility and degree of research risks. The RegEthics provides that the EC must designate members to conduct follow-up examinations of approved research projects. The number of members for follow-up review must not be less than two (2), and the review is required to be reported to the EC. Further, the EC may apply to the provincial medical ethics expert committees to provide advice on the ethics review of research that involves a relatively high-risk or special population.

Expedited Review

As delineated in the Measures-Ethics, the EC may conduct expedited review of research in the following circumstances:

Research whose risk is not greater than the minimum risk
Research in which the approved research protocol is slightly modified and does not affect the risk-benefit ratio of the research
Follow-up review of approved research
Research conducted by multiple institutions, when the EC of the participating institution confirms the ethics review opinion issued by the lead institution, etc.
Where the situation is urgent, an ethics review must be promptly carried out. In the case of emergencies such as outbreaks, ethics reviews and review opinions are generally carried out within 72 hours, but the requirements and quality of ethics reviews must not be reduced. For expedited review, the EC chairman designates two (2) or more members to conduct the ethics review and issue review opinions. The review opinions must be reported at the EC meeting. If it is discovered during this review that there is a change in the risk-benefit ratio of the research, there is a disagreement among the review members, or the review members propose that a meeting review is required, etc., then a full review procedure must be held.

During an outbreak of an epidemic, the EC-Guide advises ECs to adhere to the highest scientific and ethical standards for independent review of the research project to ensure balancing of quality and timeliness. The materials provided by the researcher can be simplified according to the situation. The EC should pay special attention to the informed consent process as participants may be improperly exploited due to their obvious vulnerability, especially when it involves high-risk and risk-uncertain research. It should be ensured that participants choose to participate voluntarily and independently after being fully informed and fully understanding the possible risks of research. Research participants or the legal representative/guardian must be allowed to withdraw from research unconditionally at any stage. See the EC-Guide for additional guidance on the EC review when there is a major epidemic risk.

Multicenter Studies

Per the Measures-Ethics, research carried out in multiple institutions may establish collaborative mechanisms for ethics review, ensuring that all institutions follow the principles of consistency and timeliness. Both the lead institution and the participating institution must organize an ethics review. The EC of the participating institution must conduct a follow-up review of the research in which the institution participates. Where establishments cooperate with enterprises and other institutions to carry out life science and medical research involving humans, the institutions must fully understand the overall situation of the research, clarify the scope of use and handling methods of biological samples and information data through agreements subject to ethics review and follow-up review, and supervise their proper disposal after the research is completed.

Per the EC-Guide, the review of international cooperative research projects requires ethics review by the lead unit. For cooperative research projects conducted in China, the trial protocols should be submitted to the EC for a single-review process and should be consistent, though the EC will accept that informed consent may vary slightly in different institutions. The RegEthics also provides that multicenter research may establish a collaborative review mechanism to ensure that the research institutions of each project follow the principles of consistency and timeliness. The lead agency EC is responsible for project review and confirmation of the ethics review results of participating institutions. ECs of the participating institutions must conduct an ethics review of the research in which the institution participates in a timely manner and provide feedback to the lead agency for review.

Exemption from Ethics Review

The Measures-Ethics states that ethics review may be exempted where human information data or biological samples are used to carry out life science and medical research involving humans if the research does not cause harm to the human body or does not involve sensitive personal information or commercial interests. This is to reduce unnecessary burdens on scientific research personnel and promote the development of life science and medical research involving people. The exemption may apply in the following circumstances:

Using lawfully obtained public data or conducting research through data generated by observing and not interfering with public conduct
Using anonymized information and data to carry out research
Using existing human biological samples to carry out research, and the source of the biological samples complies with relevant laws and regulations and ethical principles; the relevant content and purpose of the research are within the scope of the informed consent; and the research does not involve the use of human germ cells, embryos, reproductive cloning, chimerism, and heritable gene manipulation
Carrying out research using human-derived cell lines or cell lines derived from biobanks, where the relevant content and purpose of the research are within the scope authorized by the provider, and do not involve activities such as human embryonic and reproductive cloning, chimerism, and heritable gene manipulation
Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
No applicable requirements.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Overview

Per the NMPA-NHC-No101-2019, the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) oversees and supervises the registration and filing of clinical trial institutions. Drug clinical trials must be conducted in registered clinical trial institutions that meet the applicable requirements, which include having an ethics committee (EC).

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

The RegEthics states that all biomedical research institutions in China should establish their own ECs. Per SC-Opinions-No42, the NMPA adopted a registration system for institutions with qualifying conditions to be entrusted to conduct clinical trials and operate ECs. An institution is entrusted to conduct clinical trials if it has an EC and the main investigators of clinical trials have senior professional titles and have participated in more than three (3) clinical trials, among other conditions. To apply for qualification, institutions must submit an application via the online filing system (CHN-82) and fulfill the requirements pursuant to the NMPA-NHC-No101-2019. Per the Measures-Ethics, institutions must register the EC within three (3) months of its establishment and upload the information to CHN-82. Medical and healthcare institutions must register with the appropriate oversight authority. Other institutions must register with the competent department at a higher level according to their administrative affiliation. The EC must submit the previous year's work report to the appropriate institutional department before March 31st of each year, including:

A list of personnel and resumes of committee members' work
The EC charter
Work systems or relevant work procedures
Other relevant materials required by the appropriate department
When the above information changes, the institution must promptly update the information to the appropriate institutional department.

As delineated in the RegEthics and interpreted in CHN-41, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for managing ECs nationwide, organizing the inspection and management of the national ethics review of biomedical research involving human beings, establishing the National Medical Ethics Expert Committee, and for developing policies relating to ethics review. The National Medical Ethics Expert Committee conducts research on major ethical issues in research involving humans and provides policy advice and guides the provincial ECs. Per CHN-3, China established a National Science and Technology Ethics Committee to strengthen the ethics governance system. Further, the SC-EthicalGov establishes principles and guides the committee in its responsibility to develop and coordinate the ethics governance system.

The EC-Guide describes the inspection and oversight mechanisms among the ECs in China. The National Medical Ethics Expert Committee formulates an inspection and evaluation indicator system for institutional ECs, including review quality, review efficiency, committee member capabilities, conflict of interest management, etc., to guide provincial medical ethics expert committees in carrying out ethics inspections within the region. The National Medical Ethics Expert Committee also inspects, evaluates, and supervises the work of provincial medical ethics expert committees. The provincial medical ethics expert committees are responsible for conducting regular inspections and evaluations of the ethics review work of medical institutions and regional ECs within the administrative area at the same level, making recommendations on how to manage non-standard ethics review work, and may establish an information disclosure mechanism based on actual conditions. Institutional ECs should check and evaluate the indicator system, continuously improve their operations, and actively cooperate in completing various inspections and evaluations. Regular self-evaluation is encouraged to improve work quality and review efficiency.

As delineated in the RegEthics, the provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal health authorities also have ECs set up under their own administration. The provincial medical ethics expert committees assists in promoting the institutionalization and standardization of the ethics review work of human biomedical research in its administrative region, and guides, inspects, and evaluates the work of the institutional ECs in the administrative region. It also performs training and consulting work. The local health administrative department at or above the county level supervises and manages the ethics review work of biomedical research involving people in its administrative region. Per the Measures-Ethics, provincial-level health departments, in conjunction with relevant departments, must formulate measures for the establishment and management of regional ECs. The regional EC must file with the provincial health department and upload information in CHN-82.

For additional information about oversight of ECs, including inspections, see the RegEthics.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Overview

As per the DRR, the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) grants permission for clinical trials to be conducted in China pursuant to the drug registration process, in accordance with the DAL, the VaccineLaw, and other laws and regulations. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the DRR, the DAL, and the SC-Opinions-No44 require the sponsor to obtain NMPA and ethics committee (EC) approvals of a clinical trial application. As stated in the DRR, EC review may be submitted in parallel to the NMPA’s review, but the study cannot be initiated until after review and approval by the EC.

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024). The NHC-HGRmgt states that the original application process and platform (CHN-6) remain unchanged. Per the Rules-MgmtHGR, the collection, preservation, use, and external provision of China’s HGR must comply with ethical principles and pass the ethics review of ECs that have been registered with the relevant management departments. Further, with applications for administrative licenses for international scientific research cooperation, the HGR project must pass an ethics review in the respective countries (regions). As part of the application filing for international cooperative clinical trials, NMPA approvals, notices, and/or filing registration must be obtained in advance, along with the EC approvals. Therefore, EC and MOST (now the NHC) review cannot occur in parallel. (Please note that SC-Order777 amends the MgmtHumanGen to reflect the transfer of HGR management from MOST to the NHC, but the Rules-MgmtHGR has not yet been amended to show the transfer.)

Regulatory Submission

National Medical Products Administration

The NMPA-No50-2018 establishes the broad submission procedures for clinical trials, which are detailed below through implementing regulations and guidance. The DRR states that a Chinese legal entity must submit the drug registration application. Clinical trial applications are also considered drug registration applications. Overseas drug manufacturers without legal representation in China must apply for drug registration through Chinese legal persons to handle relevant drug registration matters.

The applicant should prepare materials and apply for a communication meeting with the NMPA’s Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) in accordance with the requirements of the NMPA-No48-2020, which includes requirements for different categories of meetings involving applications for new drugs. The NMPA-No48-2020 includes the application form (Appendix 1) and communication meeting materials (Appendix 2). The meeting’s purpose is to determine the integrity of the clinical trial application data and the sponsor’s ability to ensure the participant’s safety. If existing or supplemental data can support the clinical trial, then the applicant can submit a clinical trial application after the meeting or after supplementing the data. The NMPA-No51-2023 reaffirms the required pre-trial meeting and states that the applicant must submit a communication application to the CDE before 1) applying for the first clinical trial of a new drug and 2) before completing the exploratory clinical trial and conducting the confirmatory (or critical) clinical trial. The NMPA-No23-2023 provides guidance on common issues and general requirements for the Phase III pre-clinical trial meeting with the CDE in regards to innovative drugs.

Per the NMPA-No50-2018, the applicant may directly submit a clinical trial application without requesting a communication meeting with the CDE in the following cases: they clearly understand the technical guidance; have sufficient experience in drug clinical trials; can ensure the quality of data in the application; or the application is for a multicentered international clinical trial being conducted in parallel that has permission to conduct the clinical trials in countries or regions with an established and functional regulatory and monitoring infrastructure. In addition, the NMPA-No48-2020 stipulates that the application for conditional approval and/or the application for priority review and approval procedures must be communicated and confirmed with the CDE before submittal. (See below for procedures on priority review and approval.)

CHN-14 states that Chinese legal entities must submit application materials to the NMPA/CDE for a formal process review (including checking the electronic materials as described below). NMPA will process clinical trial applications within five (5) working days if the study falls within the scope of its authority; the application materials are complete and comply with the prescribed format; and if all required supplementary materials are submitted. If accepted, the CDE then organizes and conducts its review of the clinical trial application on behalf of the NMPA. As required in the ElectronicApps-Rqts and the NMPA-No110-2022, all documents for drug registration applications (including clinical trial applications, letters of commitment, declarations, and supplemental material) must be submitted electronically on CD-ROM to the CDE, in accordance with the current regulations, technical requirements for electronic CD-ROMs of application materials, and electronic file structure of drug registration applications. The ElectronicApps-Rqts clarifies that the CDE no longer accepts paper documents for administrative licensing by mail, except for applications that were accepted before January 1, 2023 and must continue to submit supplementary material in paper format. The applicant or registered agent is required to electronically sign the electronic declaration materials; the application and electronic seal can be found in the CDE’s Applicant Window (CHN-58). For details on the cover requirements for CD-ROM cases and the cover of the file bag, refer to Annex 1 in ElectronicApps-Rqts.

As indicated in CDE-Reloctn, the applicant should fill in and submit the relevant information in the "Online Appointment for Submission of Materials" module under the "Online Appointment" item in the "Applicant's Window" column of CDE’s Applicant Window (CHN-58). To mail CDs and other application materials in electronic format, applicants should use the following mailing address:

Business Management Office of the Center for Drug Evaluation
State Drug Administration
Room 102, Building 2
District 2, No. 22 Guangde Street
Beijing Economic and Technological Development Zone
Beijing, 100076
P.R. China

Per the ElectronicApps-Rqts, after receiving the disc submitted by the applicant, the CDE will determine if the disc can be read normally, passes the electronic signature verification, and has no computer viruses. If the disc does not pass these reviews, the CDE will notify the applicant and request resubmittal; the original disc will be disposed of in accordance with the CDE’s destruction procedures. If accepted, the CDE will push the electronic documents to the "Drug Business Application System" and "Drug eCTD Registration System" and the applicant is notified by SMS.

The ElectronicApps-Rqts provides additional requirements on the arrangement of discs:

Submit one (1) complete set of electronic application materials on CD-ROM (including clinical trial database, if applicable) for review
Submit one (1) complete set of electronic declaration materials on CD-ROM (including clinical trial database, if applicable) for verification at the same time.
For clinical trial database data, the relevant materials must be prepared in a separate set of CD-ROMs.
Additionally, the ElectronicApps-Rqts states that within five (5) working days after the acceptance of the drug registration application, the applicant must upload a Microsoft Word file of the application materials (e.g., pharmacy, non-clinical, and clinical reviews) through the CDE’s Applicant Window (CHN-58). The documents related to pharmaceutical materials (active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), pharmaceutical excipients, and pharmaceutical packaging materials) should be uploaded as PDF files. Further, per the DRR, supplementary materials (e.g., clinical trial research materials, consultations, and data submittals) are handled via the CDE’s Applicant’s Window (CHN-58).

Note that per CHN-14, all application materials must be in Chinese with the original language attached, and materials in other languages can be attached as reference. Chinese translations should be consistent with the original text.

The NMPA-No44-2020, the NMPA-No43-2020, and the NMPA-No10-2018 require applicants to apply the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s M4: Common Technical Document for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (CTD) (CHN-38) to the registration applications for drugs, therapeutic biological products, and vaccines. See the NMPA-No16-2018 for guidance on Phase I clinical trial applications. To standardize the submission of drug clinical trial data, meet the newly revised drug registration application data requirements, and improve the efficiency of drug review, the NMPA-No16-2020 provides guidance on the content and format of clinical trial data. The guidance is based on the data submission requirements of international regulatory agencies, including the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC).

For administrative support, applicants can request a meeting and/or consult the NMPA’s Government Service Portal (CHN-71).

Bioequivalent Studies

Per the NMPA-No230-2015, for generic drugs, a bioequivalence study will only need to be filed with the NMPA. The applicant should submit record filing materials to the NMPA 30 days before submitting the bioequivalence studies. For the generic drug filing, the applicant must obtain EC approval and sign a clinical study agreement with the clinical site prior to filing the bioequivalent study. See CHN-70 for handling guidelines for bioequivalent drugs.

Priority and Special Procedures

In addition, the DRR authorizes regulatory pathways for priority review and approval (including for breakthrough therapeutic drugs), conditional approval and special approval procedures. Per CHN-69, after the registration application is transferred to the CDE, applicants can apply for accelerated review directly to the CDE at CHN-58. CHN-69 contains the application and additional procedures for submitting applications for priority review and approval. As per the SC-Opinions-No44, the NMPA-No230-2015, and the NMPA-No51-2016, a new drug classification system, priority review for innovative drugs and those deemed to have an urgent clinical need, and other changes help China to be more innovative and expedite reviews. As delineated in the NMPA-No23-2018, for drugs listed overseas and that treat seriously life-threatening conditions, if there is no ethnic difference in the study, they can submit the clinical trial data obtained overseas and directly apply for the drug listing registration.

Protocol Changes

As delineated in the NMPA-No34-2022, when there is a protocol change during a clinical trial, the sponsor should follow these submission guidelines:

For substantial changes that may significantly increase the risk to participant safety, the sponsor must submit a clinical trial application as per the instructions above
For substantial changes that do not significantly increase participant safety risk, but may significantly affect the scientific validity and the reliability of the data, the sponsor should submit a communication meeting application to the CDE (see above)
Non-substantive changes can be implemented after being approved by the EC and filed with the NMPA
After the protocol is changed, the sponsor must update the drug clinical trial registration (See the Initiation, Agreements & Registration section) and submit the relevant updates in progress reports
National Health Commission

Per the MgmtHumanGen and the Rules-MgmtHGR, the foreign entity and the Chinese entity must jointly file an application for approval to MOST (now the NHC) and pass an ethics review in the partners’ countries. The only exception to the MOST (now the NHC) approval requirement is international collaboration in clinical trials that do not involve the export of Chinese HGR materials such as organs, tissues, or cells comprising the human genome, genes, or other genetic substances—these must be filed with MOST (NHC), which will generate a record number (see below for steps) and pass an ethics review in the partners’ countries.

As stated in the HGR-AppGuide, the HGR license application must be submitted to NHC via the Human Genetic Resources Service System (CHN-6), including application information and supporting materials. After verification, the system posts updates for the applicant.

See HGR-InfoSys for background on the online platform and contact information. For help with the online platform, contact Zhu Min, NHC’s China Biotechnology Development Center, at 010-88225151 or 010-88225168; or the information system support at 17610386080.

Ethics Review Submission

Each institutional and regional EC has its own required submission procedures.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Regulatory Authority Requirements

National Medical Products Administration

As delineated in the NMPA-No51-2023, the applicant must submit the following materials to the National Medical Products Administration’s (NMPA) Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) to have a communication meeting prior to submitting a clinical trial application for an exploratory clinical trial:

The overall clinical development plan
A complete first clinical trial protocol
A risk management plan
A subsequent clinical trial protocol, if applicable
Non-clinical research review
Pharmaceutical research review, etc.
A clear statement of the issues to be communicated
Next, the NMPA-No51-2023 states that prior to completing the exploratory clinical trial, the applicant must submit the following to CDE for another meeting to discuss conducting the confirmatory (or critical) clinical trial and the subsequent clinical trial protocol:

A preliminary analysis of the results of the early clinical trials that have been conducted
A scientific, reasonable, complete, and feasible confirmatory (or critical) clinical trial protocol based on the existing clinical trial data
A risk management plan
A review of non-clinical studies
A review of pharmaceutical studies, etc.
Per the DRR, after completing the pharmacology, toxicology, and other studies supporting the clinical trials of the drug, the applicant must submit relevant research materials to the NMPA. When applying for drug registration, the applicant must provide true, sufficient, and reliable data, materials, and samples to prove the safety, effectiveness, and quality controllability of the drug. In cases where overseas research materials and data are used to support drug registration, its source, research institution, or laboratory conditions, quality system requirements, and other management conditions should conform to prevailing international principles and applicable Chinese drug registration management requirements. CHN-14, CHN-70, and CHN-69 contain application materials and handling guidelines covering domestic drug and biological product clinical trial applications; imported drug and biological product clinical trial applications; priority review application procedures; and bioequivalence filing procedures. In general, the applications require information about the drug (e.g., names, formulation and ingredients, indications, and packaging), patents, the applicant, and the institution(s). In addition, the applications require a declaration attesting that the application and associated materials comply with the DAL, the DRR, and other applicable laws and regulations. The application and submitted data and samples must be true and legal, and they should not infringe on the rights and interests of others. The content of the electronic file submitted must be the same as the printed file. If any data is found to be false, the applicant bears the legal consequences caused by it.

The NMPA-No51-2023 requires the applicant to submit the following materials with the clinical trial application, in accordance with the NMPA-No44-2020 and the NMPA-No43-2020:

A complete clinical research and development protocol
A complete plan for the proposed clinical trial
A risk management plan
A framework for the subsequent clinical trial plan (if applicable)
The NMPA-No16-2018 provides guidance on technical information to be included in the application dossier for Phase I clinical trials:

Introductory description and overall research plan
Researcher’s manual (Investigator’s Brochure (IB))
Clinical trial plan
Pharmacy research information
Pharmacology and toxicology information
Description of previous clinical use experience
Overseas research material
Per the SC-Opinions-No42, the NMPA-No10-2018, and CHN-14, that applicants should apply the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s M4: Common Technical Document for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (CTD) (CHN-38) to the registration applications for drugs, therapeutic biological products, and vaccines.

See CHN-20 for additional analyses and overview of the China clinical trial application submission content.

National Health Commission

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024. Please note that SC-Order777 amends the MgmtHumanGen to reflect the transfer of HGR management from MOST to the NHC)). The NHC-HGRmgt states that the original application process and platform (CHN-6) remain unchanged.

The MgmtHumanGen requires that applications for a license to collect or preserve HGR meet the following conditions:

Applicants prove legal person status
The purpose of collection and/or preservation is clear and legal
The collection and/or plan is reasonable
In the case of preservation, the premises where the HGR will be deposited is legal
Proof of passing ethics review
Having a department and management system responsible for the management of collecting and/or preserving the HGR
Having premises, facilities, equipment, and personnel suitable for collection and/or preservation activities
As delineated in the MgmtHumanGen, the application for international collaborative scientific research using China’s HGR must demonstrate:

The research is not harmful to the public health, national security, or social public interests of China
The two (2) parties to the cooperation are a Chinese entity and a foreign entity with legal person status and have the basis and ability to carry out relevant work
The purpose and content of the cooperative research are clear and legal, and the duration is reasonable
The cooperative research plan is reasonable
The HGR to be used are of legal origin, and their types and quantities are consistent with the research content
The research passed an ethics review of the respective countries (regions) of the cooperation parties
The ownership of the research results is clear, and there is a reasonable and clear profit distribution plan
Information on the submission content for the HGR export license is summarized in the Specimen Import & Export section.

Ethics Committee Requirements

Each ethics committee (EC) has its own application form and clearance requirements that can differ significantly regarding the number of copies to be supplied and application format requirements.

The following list was compiled from the Measures-Ethics and the RegEthics to exemplify the common elements shared by the various application forms (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Application for Human Research Ethics Review (See CHN-27 for a sample institutional application)
Application Protocol for Results of Research or Related Technologies
Protocol
Sample ICF (See Children/Minors section for additional information)
Case Report Form
Principal investigator(s) CV(s)
NMPA approval letter
Certificate of Analysis for the drug issued by the National Institutes for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC) or corresponding provincial, autonomous region, or municipal institutes
IB
Any additional feedback from other ECs participating on the protocol
Statement of planned tasks
Letter of intention for cooperation
Letter of commitment on the reliability of research materials
Scientific opinions
Statement of no conflict of interest
Proof of the source of biological samples and information data
Site list
Site profile(s)
Product literature
Insurance policy (if any)
Materials provided to participants
Information on the lead research investigator; the legal qualification certificate of the institution; and the source of research funding
Recruitment advertisements and their release forms
An explanation of the form of publication of research results
Other relevant materials that the EC believes need to be submitted
Clinical Protocol

As delineated in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the ICH’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), the clinical protocol should include the following elements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

General information
Background information
Trial topic, purpose(s), and objective(s)
Sponsor name and address
Trial site location
Principal investigator(s) name(s), qualification(s), and address(es)
Trial design, random selection method, and blinding level
Inclusion criteria; participant treatment, inclusion, exclusion, and release procedures; and method of grouping participants
Form, dosage, route, method, and frequency of administration; treatment period; usage order of concomitant medicines; and packaging and labeling description
Investigational product registration, usage record, delivery, handling and storage conditions (See Investigational Products topic for detailed coverage of this subject)
Efficacy assessment
Safety assessment
Statistics
Direct access to source data/documents
Quality control/quality assurance
Ethics
Data handling/recordkeeping
Financing/insurance
Clinical observations, on-site visits, and measures to ensure the participant’s compliance with trial procedures
Rules regarding clinical trial termination and completion
Adverse event recording requirements, and serious adverse event reporting methods (See Safety Reporting section for additional information)
Proposed trial schedule and completion date
Publication policy
For complete protocol requirements, please refer to Chapter 6 of the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and Section 6 of CHN-37.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Overview

As stated in the DRR, ethics committee (EC) review may be submitted parallel to the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) review, but the study cannot be initiated until after review and approval by the EC.

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024). The Bioscrty-Law, the MgmtHumanGen, and the Rules-MgmtHGR, delineate that MOST (now the NHC) is responsible for China's management of HGR, which includes reviewing and approving research. Per the Rules-MgmtHGR, the collection, preservation, use, and external provision of China’s HGR must comply with ethical principles and pass the ethics review of ECs that have been registered with the relevant management departments. As part of the application filing for international cooperative clinical trials, NMPA approvals, notices, and/or filing registration must be obtained in advance. In addition, EC approvals must be submitted with the filing, so therefore cannot occur in parallel. (Please note that SC-Order777 amends the MgmtHumanGen to reflect the transfer of HGR management from MOST to the NHC, but the Bioscrty-Law and the Rules-MgmtHGR have not been amended to show the transfer.)

Regulatory Authority Approval

National Medical Products Administration

Per the DRR, upon application submittal, the NMPA will complete the administrative examination for completeness within five (5) days of receiving the application, and issue a notice of acceptance. If the application does not meet the technical requirements for review, the NMPA will notify the applicant, who must submit the additional information within five (5) days of the notice. According to CHN-14, the NMPA will process clinical trial applications within five (5) working days if the study falls within the scope of its authority; the application materials are complete and comply with the legally-prescribed format; and the applicant submits all supplementary application materials in accordance with the NMPA’s requirements. Per the DRR, the NMPA-No50-2018, and CHN-14, a clinical trial application will be considered approved after 60 working days if the applicant does not receive a rejection or an inquiry for clarification from the NMPA. These procedures do not apply in every situation and additional reforms are provided below.

The DRR indicates that the following is not included in the above time limits:

Time taken by the applicant for supplementary information, rectification after verification, and verification of production processes, quality standards, and instructions as required
Delays in the time of verification, inspection, and expert consultation meetings
If the review and approval procedure is suspended, the time occupied during the period of suspension of the review and approval procedure
Time taken by the initiation of overseas verification
The application review by the Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) and inspections and testing by National Institutes for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC) can affect the timeline beyond 60 days, as needed. The CDE conducts technical reviews and the NIFDC tests drug samples. The NMPA-No51-2023 specifies that if necessary, an expert consultation meeting may be held. For clinical trials that are approved after review, the technical review team’s conclusion and associated "Clinical Trial Approval Notice" must clearly state the indications, clinical trial protocol title, number, version number, version date, etc. The review team’s conclusion and notice may propose revisions or suggestions to the clinical trial protocol if necessary. For clinical trial protocols that require revisions, CDE will notify the applicant through a professional inquiry letter, clearly informing the applicant of the problems and revision opinions in the current protocol. The applicant must submit a revised clinical trial protocol within five (5) days, following the guidance in the Prcdrs-Changes.

According to the NMPA-No82-2020, the NMPA timelines for review and decisions for expedited applications are as follows: The CDE will review the application for breakthrough drug procedures submitted by the applicant and, if necessary, organize an expert advisory committee for demonstration. The CDE must report the review results to the applicant within 45 days after receiving the application. If it is necessary to extend the review time limit, the extended time limit must not exceed one-half of the original review time limit. The CDE must publicize the specific information and reasons for the types of drugs to be included in the breakthrough therapy program, including the name of the drug, the applicant, the proposed indication (or functional indication), the application date, and the reason for the proposed inclusion. If there is no objection within five (5) days of the public announcement, it will be included in the breakthrough treatment drug program; if an objection is raised against the publicly announced product, a written opinion must be submitted to the CDE within five (5) days; the CDE must organize another review and make a decision within 15 days and notify all relevant parties.

Per the NMPA-No79-2018, for applications to conduct clinical trials with drugs treating rare diseases with urgently needed drugs already on the market in the United States, Europe, and Japan in the past decade, the CDE completes the technical review within three (3) months after acceptance; for other overseas new drugs, the technical review is completed within six (6) months after acceptance.

The NMPA-No21-2024 describes NMPA’s pilot work plan for optimizing the review and approval of clinical trials for innovative drugs. This initiative aims to review and approve innovative drug clinical trial applications within 30 business days (a reduction from the 60 days as described above in the normal procedures). The applicant must initiate the clinical trial within 12 weeks after the approval of the clinical trial application. The pilot work will last for one (1) year and the experience of the pilot work will be summarized in July 2025. For application and eligibility details see NMPA-No21-2024 and Scope of Assessment section.

For additional details on other expedited review pathways, see the Scope of Assessment section.

National Health Commission

Per the HGR-AppGuide, for HGR license applications, the NHC will pre-screen the electronic application to ensure it is complete. If the application does not pass, then the applicant will have one (1) opportunity to correct the submission. Per Rules-MgmtHGR, MOST (now the NHC) must make an administrative licensing decision on HGR license applications within 20 working days of acceptance. HGR-AppGuide reiterates the 20 working-day deadline by NHC, the agency currently authorized to approve HGC licenses. The Rules-MgmtHGR states that where an administrative licensing decision cannot be made within 20 working days, it may be extended by 10 working days with the approval of MOST (now the NHC), and the reason for the extension must be notified to the applicant. If it is necessary to conduct hearings, inspections, testing, quarantine, appraisals, and technical reviews, this additional time required must not be counted within the time limit, and the applicant must be notified in writing of the required time.

Ethics Committee Approval

In accordance with the Measures-Ethics, the EC must carry out an ethics review and issue its opinion within 30 days of acceptance. In urgent situations, an ethics review must be promptly carried out. In the case of emergencies such as outbreaks, ethics reviews and review opinions are generally carried out within 72 hours, and the requirements and quality of ethics reviews must not be reduced. Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), the institutional EC should review a proposed clinical trial within a reasonable time. The EC’s recommendations should be issued in writing and should indicate an approval; an approval after necessary modifications have been made; a disapproval; or a decision to terminate or suspend an already approved trial.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Overview

Per the DRR, clinical trials must be conducted in institutions conducting drug clinical trials that comply with relevant regulations, and abide by the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, including written approval from the ethics committee (EC) to the researcher before clinical trial implementation. Further, clinical trials of vaccines must be implemented or organized by China’s designated three-level medical institutions or disease prevention and control institutions at or above the provincial level that meet the prescribed conditions.

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024). The Bioscrty-Law, the MgmtHumanGen, and the Rules-MgmtHGR delineate that MOST (now the NHC) is responsible for China's management of HGR, which includes reviewing and approving research before initiation. Per the Rules-MgmtHGR, clinical trials involving the collection, preservation, use, and export of China’s HGR must be approved by ECs in the relevant institutions. Further, applications for administrative licenses for international cooperation clinical trials (without exports) using HGR must pass an ethics review in the partner countries and be filed with MOST (now the NHC) before initiating the study. The Rules-MgmtHGR also state that clinical trial applications must pass a security review organized by MOST (now the NHC) if the study’s provision or opening of HGR information to foreign entities may impact China’s public health, national security, or the social public interest.

Clinical Trial Agreement

As delineated in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), the sponsor must sign an agreement or contract with the participating institution(s). The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 also states that before the trial begins, the sponsor and the investigator must sign a written agreement regarding the trial protocol, monitoring, auditing, and standard operating procedures, as well as each party’s responsibilities during the trial.

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the agreement must include the following elements:

Compliance with this specification and relevant clinical trial laws and regulations during the implementation of clinical trials
Implementation of the trial protocol agreed to by the sponsor and investigator, and approved by the EC
Compliance with data recording and reporting procedures
Consent to supervision and inspection
Retention period of necessary documents related to clinical trials
The agreement on publishing articles and intellectual property rights
Clinical Trial Registration

Per the DRR, the sponsor must register the drug clinical trial plan and other information on the drug clinical trial registration and information disclosure platform before launching the drug clinical trial. The NMPA-No9-2020 requires the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA)'s Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) to establish and maintain this registry (CHN-53). Before starting a clinical trial, the clinical trial information must be registered in any of these situations:

The clinical trial has been approved by the NMPA
The clinical trial of a chemical drug bioequivalence test was recorded and the record number obtained
Phase IV clinical trials and post-marketing studies were conducted in accordance with the requirements of the drug registration certificate or NMPA notice
Other situations required for registration according to the NMPA
Also see the handling guideline for clinical trial registration (CHN-13) for more information and frequently asked questions.

Governance

Pursuant to the NHC-ClinProjMgmt, medical institutions must develop internal rules and standard operating procedures (SOPs) for administering clinical studies; centralize financial management of clinical study projects; and maintain a project-based approval system and supervision throughout the study process. In addition to having an EC, medical institutions must also establish a Clinical Study Administration Committee and a subordinate body, and a Clinical Study Administration Division to handle daily project administration. For detailed requirements, see the NHC-ClinProjMgmt.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Safety Reporting Definitions

In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of China’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – All adverse medical events that occur after participants receive the experimental drugs. They can be manifested as symptoms and signs, diseases, or abnormal laboratory tests, but they may not be causally related to the experimental drugs
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life threatening, requires hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity, or causes a congenital anomaly/birth defect after the participant receives the experimental drug during a clinical trial
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – Any adverse or undesired reactions that may be related to the experimental drugs that occur during clinical trials. There is at least a reasonable possibility of the causal relationship between the experimental drug and the adverse event (i.e., the correlation cannot be ruled out)
Suspicious and Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) – Suspicious and unexpected serious clinical manifestations that exceed the existing information, such as the Investigator's Brochure (IB) of the trial drug, the instructions of the marketed drug, or the summary of product characteristics
In addition, the G-SftyRptStds includes “Serious Adverse Drug Reactions” (SADRs) as well as other important medical events, which require medical judgement to determine if measures are needed to prevent the occurrence of one (1) of the preceding.

See the NMPA-No31-2024 for NMPA’s guidance on evaluating the correlation between AEs and drugs used in clinical trials.

Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the investigator should immediately report all SAEs in writing to the sponsor, and then provide a detailed and written follow-up report in a timely manner. However, this does not include SAEs that do not need to be reported immediately per the trial protocol or other documents (such as the investigator’s brochure). SAE reports and follow-up reports should indicate the participant’s identification code in the clinical trial, not the participant’s real name, citizenship number, and residential address. AEs and abnormal laboratory values that are important for the safety evaluation specified in the test plan must be reported to the sponsor in accordance with the requirements and time limit of the test plan. For reports involving deaths, the investigator should provide the sponsor and the ethics committee (EC) with other required information, such as autopsy reports and final medical reports.

The Measures-Ethics state that for research that has been approved for implementation, researchers must immediately report SAEs that occur during the research process to the EC. The EC must conduct a timely review to determine whether the measures taken by researchers to protect the personal safety and health rights and interests of research participants are adequate, reassess the risk-benefit ratio of the research, and issue review opinions.

Sponsor Responsibilities

Per the DRR, the sponsor must regularly submit a safety update report to the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA)'s Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) via the Applicant’s Window (CHN-58). The safety update report during the research and development period should be submitted once a year, and within two (2) months after the full year following approval of the drug clinical trial. The CDE may require the sponsor to adjust the reporting cycle based on the review situation. Additional guidance on the safety update report is provided in the NMPA-No7-2020 and the NMPA-No65-2021. For international multicenter clinical trials, NMPA-No2-2015 states that sponsors should unify the collection and evaluation methods of AEs, use a unified glossary to code AEs, and establish a unified safety database for the collection and evaluation of SAEs. AE or SAE reports should comply with the relevant national and regional requirements.

The DRR requires the sponsor to report SUSARs and other potentially serious safety risks to the CDE in a timely manner in accordance with relevant requirements. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the G-SftyRptStds specify that the sponsor is responsible for the safety assessment of the drugs during the trial period. The G-SftyRptStds and the NMPA-No65-2021 state that during the clinical trial, the sponsor judges whether SUSARs are related to the drug. When the sponsor and the investigator cannot agree on the causal relationship between the AE and the drug, the experimental drug should not be ruled out and it must be reported. Also see NMPA-No102-2019 for guidelines on classifying AEs in clinical trials of investigational vaccines.

The NMPA-No16-2023 and the NMPA-No5-2020 state that a sound pharmacovigilance system should be established to monitor safety risks during drug clinical trials, which should include comprehensive drug data collection and risk monitoring, identification, assessment, and control. In addition, safety problems and risks should be discovered in a timely manner, and necessary risk management measures should be taken proactively, such as adjusting clinical trial plans, and suspending or terminating clinical trials, etc. The NMPA-No5-2020 provides guidance on evaluating and managing safety issues and requires sponsors to actively cooperate with clinical trial institutions and other relevant parties to strictly implement the main responsibility of safety risk management.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 requires the sponsor to promptly notify the investigator, the clinical trial institution, and the drug regulatory authority of issues discovered in the clinical trial that may affect the safety of participants, the implementation of the clinical trial, and the consent of the ECs. Further, the sponsor must promptly report SUSARs to all participating investigators, clinical trial institutions, and ECs; sponsors must also report SUSARs to drug regulatory and health authorities. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 states that after receiving safety information from the sponsor, the investigator should sign the documentation and consider whether to treat the participant and make corresponding adjustments to the protocol.

The NMPA-No65-2021 and the G-SftyRptStds specify reporting timelines for unexpected death or serious life-threatening adverse reactions. The sponsor must submit the report as soon as possible after first learned, but not more than seven (7) days; and detailed follow-up information should be submitted within the next eight (8) days. For SUSARs, the report should be submitted as soon as possible after the first notification, but not more than 15 days. In addition to individual SUSAR reports, other potentially serious safety risk information should be reported to the CDE as soon as possible, and medical treatments should be decided upon for each situation. Generally, information that significantly affects the evaluation of the drug’s risks and benefits, changes in drug usage, or information that affects the overall drug development process, falls into this category. Domestic and foreign safety reports should be reported in Chinese. Further, the DAL states that if there is a safety problem or risk during the clinical trial, the sponsor must adjust the clinical trial plan, suspend or terminate the clinical trial, and report the issue to the NMPA.

See NMPA-No60-2021 for guidance on writing safety reference information in the investigator’s manual.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

As per the NMPA-No50-2018, the NMPA-No10-2018, and the G-SftyRptStds, investigators must comply with the rapid reporting requirements in the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s E2A Guideline, Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (CHN-39), and ICH E2B(R3), Electronic Transmission of Individual Case Safety Reports (CHN-40). As indicated in the G-SftyRptStds, all SUSARs from clinical trials should be reported in compliance with E2A and E2B(R3). To comply with these requirements, the project’s electronic safety database must meet the E2B(R3)’s XML format and be submitted to the CDE in Chinese (CHN-58). Potentially serious security risks can be sent as a “Quick Report” through e-mail to: lcqjywjj@cde.org.cn. See NMPA-No17-2023 for frequently asked questions and answers related to rapid safety reporting. Additional questions pertaining to rapid reporting can be sent to ywjjxtwt@cde.org.cn.

According to the NMPA-No230-2015, in clinical trials of new drugs, which now only require a one-time approval, after the completion of Phase I and Phase II trials, the applicant should submit all test results and demonstrate that no safety problems were found before beginning the next phase of the trial. Furthermore, NMPA-No230-2015 states that the applicant must submit all adverse event data on time.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) require the investigator to submit an annual report on the clinical trial to the ethics committee (EC). In addition, the investigator must provide a progress report in accordance with requirements established by the EC. When there is a situation that significantly affects the implementation of clinical trials or increases the risks to participants, the investigator should report it in writing to the sponsor, the EC, and the clinical trial institution as soon as possible. The Measures-Ethics reiterates that the researcher must submit progress reports. The NMPA-No2-2015 requires sponsors and researchers to submit the progress of international multicenter clinical trials to the EC, including but not limited to enrollment, important decisions of the independent data supervision committee (if applicable), and safety information in their own countries and other countries/regions, so as to facilitate the EC’s understanding of the overall situation of the trial, conduct follow-up reviews, and protect the safety and rights of participants.

According to the NMPA-No230-2015, in clinical trials of new drugs, which now only require a one-time approval, after the completion of Phase I and Phase II trials, the applicant should submit all test results and demonstrate that no safety problems were found before beginning the next phase of the trial. Furthermore, NMPA-No230-2015 states that the applicant must submit an annual report on time.

CHN-37 states that the investigator should promptly provide written reports to the sponsor and the institutional EC on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to participants. In addition, the investigator should submit written summaries of the trial status to the institutional EC annually, or more frequently, if requested by the institutional EC. Per the Measures-Ethics researchers must promptly submit reports on suspension, termination, and completion to the EC.

Final Report

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, after the clinical trial is completed, the investigator must report to the clinical trial institution. The investigator must provide the EC with a summary of the clinical trial results and provide the sponsor with the clinical trial related reports required by the drug regulatory authority. Per the DRR, the sponsor must register clinical trial results on the Applicant’s Window (CHN-58).

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

As per the DRR, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), a sponsor is defined as a company, institution, or organization that initiates a clinical trial, and is responsible for managing, financing, and monitoring the trial. The DRR further specifies that the enterprise or institution applicant must be able to bear corresponding legal responsibilities. Per the DRR, applicants who are approved to carry out clinical trials of drugs are referred to as “sponsors” of clinical trials. If the sponsor changes, the changed sponsor must bear the relevant responsibilities and obligations of the drug clinical trial.

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37, a sponsor can authorize a contract research organization (CRO) to carry out certain work and obligations regarding the clinical trial. The sponsor can entrust part or all of the work and tasks of its clinical trial to the CRO, but the sponsor is still the ultimate person responsible for the quality and reliability of the clinical trial data and should supervise the various tasks undertaken by the CRO. The CRO must implement quality assurance and quality control measures. Any work entrusted by the sponsor to the CRO must be documented in a signed agreement. The sponsor is still responsible for work and tasks that are not clearly entrusted to the CRO. The requirements for sponsors in this specification apply to CROs that undertake the work and tasks related to sponsors.

A sponsor may be domestic or foreign; however, per the DRR and CHN-11, a Chinese legal entity must submit the clinical trial application.

Per the DAL, the sponsor is also referred to as the “holder” of the drug registration certificate, which is an entity that has obtained a drug registration certificate and includes institutions that are responsible for clinical trials. The legal representative and principal person holding the drug registration certificate is fully responsible for the quality of the drug used in a clinical trial. When the holder of the certificate is an overseas entity, their designated legal person in China must fulfill the same obligations as the holder of the drug registration certificate and bear joint and several liability with the holder of the drug registration certificate.

Definition of Foreign Entities in Regard to Collecting or Preserving Human Genetic Resources

For purposes of obtaining a human genetic resources (HGR) license, the HGR-AppGuide defines foreign entities as institutions established or actually controlled by overseas organizations or individuals including the following:

A foreign organization or individual that holds or indirectly holds more than 50% of the shares, equity, voting rights, property shares, or other similar interests of an institution
A foreign organization or individual that holds or indirectly holds less than 50% of the shares, equity, voting rights, property shares, or other similar rights and interests of the institution, but the voting rights or other rights and interests they enjoy are sufficient to control or exert significant influence on the decision-making, management, and other behaviors of the institution
Foreign organizations or individuals, through investment relationships, agreements, or other arrangements, are able to control or exert significant influence on the decision-making, management, and other behaviors of the institution
Other circumstances prescribed by laws, administrative regulations, and rules.
The HGR-AppGuide indicates that domestically-invested actual controlling institutions located in Hong Kong and Macao are regarded as Chinese units.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Overview

Per the DRR, drug clinical trials must be conducted in institutions conducting drug clinical trials that comply with relevant regulations and abide by the clinical trial quality management standards. As set forth in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and institution(s) for the clinical trial, taking into account the appropriateness and availability of the study site and facilities. The sponsor must also ensure that the investigator(s) are qualified by training and experience. Prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s) and the institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and an investigator’s brochure (IB). Additionally, the sponsor must define and allocate all study related duties and responsibilities to the relevant parties participating in the study. Furthermore, the sponsor must sign an agreement or contract with the participating institution(s). The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 indicates that for clinical trials involving multiple institutions, the sponsor must be responsible for selecting the team leader unit. (See the Submission Content section for additional information on clinical trial application requirements). See the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 for additional details on investigator and clinical trial institution requirements.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 states that investigators and clinical trial institutions must possess the appropriate qualifications, training, and experience to assume responsibility for the trial. Further, they must be familiar with the trial protocol, IB, and related materials and information provided by the sponsor. They must be familiar with and abide by clinical trial regulations and laws and keep an authorization form for the division of responsibilities signed by the investigator. Researchers and clinical trial institutions must accept the supervision and inspection organized by the sponsor as well as by the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA). In addition, with the sponsor’s consent, investigators and clinical trial institutions can authorize qualified individuals or units to undertake clinical trial-related responsibilities and functions.

With regard to institutions, the DRR further delineates that drug clinical trials must be conducted in institutions that have the corresponding required conditions and are registered. For example, vaccine clinical trials must be implemented or organized by China’s designated three-level medical institutions or disease prevention and control institutions at or above the provincial level that meet the required conditions.

Institutional Registration

Per the SC-Opinions-No42 and the NMPA-NHC-No101-2019, the NMPA adopted a registration system for institutions with qualifying conditions to be entrusted to conduct clinical trials and operate ethics committees (ECs). This reform eases institutional burdens by removing the pre-approval accreditation requirements. Among other conditions, the NMPA-NHC-No101-2019 specifies that an institution is entrusted to conduct clinical trials if the main investigators of clinical trials have senior professional titles and have participated in more than three (3) clinical trials. The main investigator must supervise the implementation of drug clinical trials and the performance of each researcher in the performance of their work duties and take measures to implement the quality management of drug clinical trials to ensure the reliability and accuracy of the data. Institutions conducting drug clinical trials must submit a work summary report of clinical trials in the previous year before January 31 of each year. NMPA-No1-2024 provides guidance and templates to institutions conducting drug clinical trials on filling out this annual work summary report. NMPA-NHC-No101-2019 indicates that the NMPA is establishing a record management information platform for the registration and operation management of institutions conducting drug clinical trials, as well as the supervision and inspection by drug regulatory agencies.

For additional details on the registration conditions, operations management, supervision, and inspection of institutions, see the NMPA-NHC-No101-2019. Also see CHN-12 for additional details on registering institutions to carry out clinical trials in China.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

The DRR requires foreign applicants/sponsors to designate Chinese legal entities to handle relevant drug registration matters.

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024).

Per the Rules-MgmtHGR, when data or information on human genetic resources (HGR) is provided or made available for use by foreign organizations, individuals, and institutions, the Chinese entity must notify MOST (now the NHC) in advance and may be required to pass a security review. The notification must report on the following:

The purpose and use of providing or opening up the use of China’s HGR information to foreign entities
The HGR data and backup copy of the information
The basic circumstances of the foreign entities receiving the HGR information
Risk assessments for the protection of Chinese HGR to foreign entities
This notification is not required during international scientific research that is licensed/recorded, where the Chinese unit provides the foreign party with information on HGR generated by the cooperation, and if the international cooperation agreement has stipulated that it will be used by the two (2) partners.

Note, that the Rules-MgmtHGR adopts a broad definition of “foreign units” that includes foreign organizations and institutions, as well as entities established or under “actual control” by foreign entities or individuals. See the Rules-MgmtHGR and Rules-MgmtHGR-Interp for specific guidelines for determining actual control.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, CHN-37, and the NMPA-No65-2021 recommend establishing a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial. The EC-Guide indicates that any DSMB reports should be submitted to the EC during follow-up reviews, if applicable.

As delineated in G-SftyRptStds and the NMPA-No65-2021, the sponsor should appoint fulltime staff to monitor clinical trial safety information and manage serious adverse event reporting. Relevant standard operating procedures should be established, and all relevant personnel should be trained. The sponsor is also responsible to ensure staff understand the latest security information, conduct timely risk assessments, provide relevant information to inform participants and interested parties, and quickly report unexpected serious adverse reactions. Annex 3 to NMPA-No50-2018 requires that application materials for Phase I clinical trials focus on participant safety and describe the establishment of a drug safety committee and a pharmacovigilance system based on the clinical trial protocol.

NMPA-No2-2015 states that in large-scale international multicenter drug clinical trials, the establishment of independent data monitoring committees and endpoint determination committees for key indicators is usually considered. For critical clinical trials with relatively large sample sizes and relatively long research times, especially those driven by clinical events, it is necessary to establish an independent data supervision committee and establish clear working mechanisms and procedures. NMPA recommends that for studies in which Chinese patients account for more than 2%, Chinese experts be included in the global core independent data monitoring board. For situations where human factors may affect the determination of research results, such as international multicenter drug clinical trials where imaging evaluation results are the key evaluation endpoints, it is necessary to establish a unified endpoint judgment committee for the main research indicators to uniformly conduct independent evaluation and judgment of the main research indicators.

Multicenter Studies

Per NMPA-No2-2015, for international multicenter drug clinical trials, sponsors should ensure that investigators have the qualifications and ability to undertake the clinical trial. Sponsors should provide unified training for researchers, including training on clinical trial protocols, standard operating procedures, test record forms, computer use, etc. The training should clearly explain and translate various definitions; unify diagnosis, efficacy, and safety evaluation indicators; and ensure the consistency of researchers' understanding of clinical trial protocols and evaluation of relevant indicators.

In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37, to carry out multicenter clinical trials, the sponsor must ensure that all centers participating in the clinical trial comply with the trial protocol. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 specifies additional sponsor requirements:

Provide the same test plan to each center; each center must comply with the same unified evaluation standards for clinical and laboratory data and instructions for filling out the case report form (CRF)
Ensure each center uses the same CRF to record the test data obtained in clinical trials
Indicate in the trial protocol if the investigator needs to increase the collection of experimental data, and provide the investigator with an additional CRF
Develop a written document clarifying the responsibilities of the investigators in each center before the start of the clinical trial
Ensure communication among researchers in each center
The NMPA-No35-2017 delineates that researchers can conduct Phase I of multi-regional clinical trials (MRCT) of imported investigational new drugs and therapeutic biological products (excluding vaccines) simultaneously in China. Upon completion of a MRCT in China, the marketing application of the imported drug can be submitted immediately and should comply with the DRR. See Submission Content section.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Insurance

As set forth in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the sponsor is responsible for providing the investigator and clinical trial institution with legal and economic insurance or a guarantee related to the clinical trial, which must be compatible with the nature and degree of risk of the clinical trial. This insurance should not include damage caused by the investigator and the clinical trial institution itself. The International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) guides sponsors on providing insurance. See CHN-11 for an analysis of clinical trial insurance in China.

Per NMPA-No2-2015, for insurance provided by overseas insurance companies in international multicenter clinical trials, the sponsor should ensure that participants in China can effectively and fully claim compensation, and give priority to protecting the rights and interests of participants.

Compensation

Injury or Death

Per the Measures-Ethics, when research participants suffer research-related damages, they must receive timely and free treatment, and they must be compensated in accordance with laws and regulations and the agreement of both parties. In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the EC-Guide, the sponsor must take appropriate measures to ensure that the participants and researchers can be compensated. The sponsor must bear the costs of diagnosis and treatment for the damage or death of the participant related to the clinical trial, as well as the corresponding compensation. Further, the sponsor must provide free trial drugs to participants and pay for medical testing related to clinical trials.

In addition, CHN-37 provides guidance to sponsors on providing compensation to research participants in the event of trial-related injuries or death. The sponsor must explain to participants the compensation and/or treatment available to them in the event of trial-related injuries.

Trial Participation

Per Measures-Ethics, research participants must not be charged research-related fees, and appropriate compensation must be given to the research participants for reasonable expenses incurred in the course of the research process.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

Per the DRR, the management of drugs used in clinical trials must comply with the clinical trial quality management regulations specified in NMPA-GCP-No57-2020. As stated in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the NMPA-No65-2021, the sponsor must establish quality control (QC) and quality assurance (QA) systems for the clinical trial. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) specify that the quality management system for clinical trials should cover the entire process of clinical trials, including the design, implementation, recording, evaluation, result reports, and filing of clinical trials. NMPA-No65-2021 reiterates that sponsors must establish a quality management and pharmacovigilance system for investigational products (IPs). This system must collect safety information, monitor risk, identify and control safety problems in a timely manner, proactively take necessary risk control measures, and evaluate the effectiveness of risk control measures to protect participant safety.

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, quality management includes effective trial plan design, data collection methods and procedures, and information collection necessary for decision-making in clinical trials. The QA and QC methods for clinical trials should be consistent with the inherent risks of clinical trials and the importance of the information collected. Sponsors should ensure the operability of all aspects of clinical trials and avoid over-complication of trial procedures and data collection. The trial protocol, case report form (CRF), and other related documents should be clear, concise, and consistent. During an inspection by the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA), both the research and management teams should send personnel to participate.

The sponsor must conduct quality management based on risk. The key links and data that protect the rights and safety of participants and ensure the reliability of clinical trial results must be clearly defined when the sponsor formulates the trial plan. Risk should be considered from two (2) levels: 1) system level, such as facilities and equipment, standard operating procedures (SOPs), computerized systems, personnel, and suppliers; and 2) clinical trial level, such as trial drugs, trial design, data collection and recording, and the informed consent process. The risk assessment should consider the possibility of errors under existing risk control; the impact of the errors on the protection of participants’ rights and safety; and the extent to which the errors have been monitored. Control measures to reduce risks should be embodied in the design and implementation of the test plan, the monitoring plan, the contract with parties, SOPs, and various trainings. During clinical trials, quality management should be recorded and communicated with relevant parties in a timely manner to promote continuous improvement of risk assessment and quality. The sponsor must regularly evaluate the risk control measures based on new knowledge and experience during the clinical trial period to ensure the effectiveness and applicability of the current quality management. In addition, the sponsor’s quality management system must meet the following requirements:

The sponsor is responsible for formulating, implementing, and updating the SOPs related to clinical trial QA and QC systems
The entire process of clinical trials and laboratory testing must be carried out in strict accordance with the quality management SOPs, and each stage of data processing has QC to ensure that all data are reliable and the data processing process is correct
The sponsor must sign a contract with all relevant parties, including investigators and clinical trial institutions, to clarify the responsibilities of each party
The contract signed by the sponsor and the relevant parties must indicate that the sponsor and the NMPA can access the clinical trial site to consult the source data, source documents, and reports
To standardize the submission of drug clinical trial data, meet the drug registration application data requirements, and improve the efficiency of drug review, the NMPA-No16-2020 provides guidance on the content and format of clinical trial data. The guidance is based on the data submission requirements of international regulatory agencies, including the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC). In addition, the NMPA-No74-2020 has details on the management of records and data that must be provided to the NMPA during clinical trials in China. It indicates that data refers to the information generated during drug development, production, operation, and use, including text, values, symbols, images, audio, pictures, maps, barcodes, etc.

Per the NMPA-No2-2015, for international multicenter clinical trials when the main efficacy and important safety evaluation indicators are laboratory evaluation indicators, it is recommended to establish a central laboratory for unified testing. The laboratory should have the corresponding clinical laboratory qualifications. Where a regional central laboratory is established, the quality control consistency verification between laboratories must be carried out regularly to ensure the consistency and reliability of experimental results.

The NMPA-No48-2018 presents quality management guidelines for Phase III clinical trials using innovative drugs. The guide addresses information the sponsor should provide to the NMPA related to the active pharmaceutical ingredient and its production, considering participants’ safety, drug characteristics, dosage form and route of administration, development stage, target population, and severity of the disease.

Finally, the NMPA has issued the following quality management and technical guidelines for conduct during clinical trials. See each of these documents, for additional details:

NMPA-No29-2024 – guidelines for pharmaceutical research and changes to biological products during clinical trials
Risk-Prcdr – procedures for safety information assessment and risk management during clinical trials
DctrlzCTs-Rare – technical guidelines for decentralized clinical trials using rare disease drugs
GeneCTs-Rare – technical guidelines for clinical trials of gene therapy products for rare diseases
PatientCtr-Risk, PatientCtr-Imp, and PatientCtr-Design – technical guidelines for patient-centered drug clinical trials, including design and risk assessment
NMPA-No15-2023 – technical guidelines for clinical trials of chemical compound drugs
NMPA-No34-2022 – guidelines for protocol changes during drug clinical trials
NMPA-No32-2022 – guidelines for clinical trials of topically administered local effective drugs
NMPA-No31-2022 – guidelines for conduct of research with in vivo gene therapy products
NMPA-No30-2022 – guidelines for conduct of research involving immune cell therapy products
NMPA-No29-2022 – guidelines for conduct of research with in vitro gene modification
NMPA-No27-2022 – guidelines for conduct of research involving specific human immunoglobulins
NMPA-No22-2021 – a research and development model to guide researchers in managing pharmaceutical changes of innovative drugs
NMPA-No17-2022 – guidelines for clinical pharmacological research of biosimiliars
NMPA-No4-2022 – guidelines for research of human bioavailability of bioequivalence of innovative drugs
NMPA-No71-2021 – guidelines for research of drugs for rare diseases
NMPA-No68-2021 – guiding principles for writing the clinical risk management plan
NMPA-No66-2021 – guiding principles for multiplicity issues during drug clinical trials, which refers to multiple testing problems that can lead to errors and inappropriate interpretation of trial results
NMPA-No63-2021 – guidelines for drug clinical trial data management and statistical analysis plan
NMPA-No62-2021 – guidelines for the application of patient-reported outcomes in drug clinical development
NMPA-No59-2021 – guidelines for analyzing the effectiveness of clinical studies of drugs
NMPA-No50-2021 – guidelines for long-term follow-up for clinical research of gene therapy products
NMPA-No6-2021 – guidelines for sponsors in adopting and implementing an adaptive design to improve the success and quality of the research results
Chngs-MktChem – technical guidelines for pharmaceutical change research of listed chemicals
Chngs-MktChemBio – technical guidelines for clinical changes in marketed chemicals and biological products
NMPA-No21-2021 – technical requirements of pharmaceutical research and evaluation of overseas listed and domestic unlisted chemicals
NMPA-No54-2020 – technical guidelines for clinical trials of improved chemical drugs
Chngs-MktBio – technical guidelines for pharmaceutical change research of marketed biological products
Per the VaccineLaw, during the research and development phase for vaccines, the sponsor must establish a biosafety management system that strictly controls biosafety risks, strengthens biosafety management of pathogenic microorganisms (e.g., bacterial strains), protects the health of operators and the public, and safeguards against bacterial toxicity. The use of pathogenic microorganisms, such as strains, is legal and legitimate. The strains and cell strains used during research and development must have clear histories, biological characteristics, and generations. Detailed documentation and archives must be established to ensure that the source is legal, clear, and traceable; if the source is unknown, then it cannot be used.

As delineated in MgmtHumanGen, for international cooperative projects using human genetic resources (HGR), the sponsor must ensure the participation of the Chinese partner. During the study period, the Chinese partner and its researchers must fully participate in the research. All records and data information in the research process, and all backup documentation, must be accessible to the Chinese partner. Both the foreign and Chinese parties have the right to use the information developed with the HGR.

Monitoring Requirements

As per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the purpose of monitoring is to ensure the rights and interests of participants in clinical trials, to ensure that the data in trial records and reports are accurate and complete, and to ensure that trials comply with the agreed protocol and relevant regulations. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 require the sponsor to establish a systematic, prioritized, risk-based method to monitor clinical trials. NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 directs the sponsor to formulate audit procedures and an inspection plan with a special emphasis on protecting the rights and interests of participants, ensuring the authenticity of data, and managing risks in clinical trials. On-site supervision and centralized supervision should be conducted based on the combination of risks of clinical trials. The audit procedures must establish objectives, methods, frequency, and format content of audit reports. All problems observed and discovered by the auditors during the inspection process must be recorded in writing. The sponsor may conduct special inspections in addition to routine inspections. The sponsor selects a person independent of the clinical trial to serve as an inspector. Inspectors must have received corresponding training and inspection experience and be able to effectively perform inspection duties.

As indicated in NMPA-No2-2015, for international multicenter clinical trials, the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) entrusted by the sponsor must conduct supervision of each clinical trial center, the monitoring report must be archived, and the sponsor must periodically review the monitoring work. The sponsor or the CRO must formulate an audit plan and have a unified audit report template and audit result reporting system.

Further, NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 states that researchers and clinical trial institutions must agree to supervision and inspection organized by the sponsor and the NMPA. The sponsor must provide an inspection report or certificate when requested by the NMPA. In accordance with the DRR and CHN-8, NMPA’s Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) will make a risk-based decision on whether to conduct an inspection of a clinical trial, based on the level of drug innovation and the past verification history of the clinical trial site. See NMPA-No56-2023 for NMPA’s management measures that standardize the supervision and inspection of institutions conducting drug clinical trials. In addition, NMPA-No22-2022 indicates that sponsors have the main responsibility for pharmacovigilance inspections during the conduct of a clinical trial. See NMPA-No22-2022 for key considerations during routine and causal inspections, evaluation criteria, risk factors, inspection methods, and other inspection implementation guidance.

The NMPA-No28-2020 further clarifies the link between on-site inspection of drug registration and the pre-market good manufacturing practice (GMP) compliance inspection. Based on the innovation and risk characteristics of an IP, the pre-market GMP compliance inspection will be conducted by the appropriate level regulatory authority (i.e., the CDE, province, autonomous region, or municipality). See the NMPA-No28-2020 for detailed inspection requirements.

Also, see the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 for additional guidance on audits and inspections. See NMPA-No11-2022 for guiding principles on use of risk-based statistical evaluation methods for centralized monitoring of drug clinical trials.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 mandates that researchers, clinical trial institutions, and sponsors abide by the trial protocol, SOPs, and relevant laws and regulations. If non-compliance is found, the sponsor must take immediate measures to correct them and ensure the clinical trials are in compliance. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 state that when an important compliance problem is discovered that may have a significant impact on the safety and rights of participants or the reliability of clinical trial data, the sponsor must conduct a root cause analysis in a timely manner and take appropriate corrective and preventive measures.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 specifies that if the trial protocol is violated or there is a serious quality problem, the sponsor must hold the relevant personnel accountable and send a written report to the NMPA at CHN-58. When it is found that the investigator or clinical trial institution has serious non-compliance problems, the sponsor must terminate the investigator or clinical trial institution from continuing to participate in the clinical trial. The sponsor should also send a written report to the NMPA. At the same time, sponsors and researchers should take corresponding emergency safety measures to protect the safety and rights of participants. A sponsor who terminates or suspends clinical trials early must immediately notify the investigator, clinical trial institutions, and the NMPA, and explain the reasons.

Further, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 states that when a clinical trial is completed or terminated early, the sponsor must submit a clinical trial report to the NMPA. The clinical trial summary report must comprehensively, completely, and accurately reflect the clinical trial results. The safety and effectiveness data of the clinical trial summary report must be consistent with the clinical trial source data. The Measures-Ethics indicates that for research that has been approved for implementation, researchers must promptly submit reports on suspension and termination to the EC.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Electronic Data Processing System

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the sponsor must meet the following requirements in electronic data processing during clinical trials:

Select qualified personnel to supervise data processing, data verification, statistical analysis, and the writing of trial summary reports
Use an electronic data management system that passes reliable system verification and meets the pre-set technical performance to ensure the integrity, accuracy, and reliability of the test data, and to ensure that the system is always valid for verification during the entire test process
Have complete standard operating procedures (SOPs) that cover the setup, installation, and use of electronic data management; the SOPs must describe the verification, functional testing, data collection and processing, system maintenance, system safety, testing, change control, data backup, recovery, and system emergency plans
Ensure the SOPs cover the responsibilities and training of sponsors, researchers, and clinical trial institutions when using computerized systems
Prescribe in advance the method of data modification
Ensure that the data conversion process is consistent with the original data and visibility is maintained during the process
Ensure the security of the electronic data management system, and that unauthorized personnel cannot access it; keep a list of persons authorized to modify data; electronic data is backed up in time; clinical trials designed by blind methods are always blinded, including data entry and processing
In accordance with NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, when the information system of a clinical trial institution has the conditions for establishing a clinical trial electronic medical record, the researcher should use it first, and the corresponding computerized system should have complete authority management and audit trails, which can be traced to the creator or modifier of the record. Researchers must supervise the data collection. They must ensure that all clinical trial data are obtained from clinical trial source documents and trial records, and are accurate, complete, readable, and timely. The source data should be attributable, legible, original, accurate, complete, consistent, and durable. The modification of the source data must be explained and transparent. Relevant medical records should be included in the outpatient or inpatient medical record system. During the processing of clinical trial information, care must be taken to avoid illegal or unauthorized access, disclosure, dissemination, modification, damage, or loss of information. The record, processing, and preservation of clinical trial data must ensure the confidentiality of records and participant information. In the contract with the investigator and the clinical trial institution, the sponsor should clarify the retention time, cost, and handling of the documents.

Per the NMPA-No2-2015, international multicenter clinical trials must adopt a unified data processing center for data query, verification, storage, and analysis.

The NMPA-No74-2020 has additional guidance and requirements for the sponsor’s electronic system.

In addition, as per the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor must ensure that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. Per CHN-37, the sponsor should base their approach to validate such systems on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use and the potential of the system to affect participant protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, the sponsor should maintain SOPs for the systems that cover system setup, installation, and use. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the system users should be provided with training. Refer to CHN-37 for additional information.

Records Management

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37, the sponsor must retain the clinical trial data related to the sponsor and participating parties in the clinical trial. The transfer of data ownership must comply with the requirements of relevant laws and regulations. The sponsor must send written notification to the investigator and clinical trial institution about the requirements for preserving clinical trial records and when the trial-related records are no longer needed. At the beginning of a clinical trial, the investigator, clinical trial institution, and sponsor must establish archive management of the necessary documents. At the end of the clinical trial, an inspector must review and confirm the necessary documents of the investigator, clinical trial institution, and sponsor, and these documents must be properly kept in their respective clinical trial archives. Clinical trial documents must be retained for at least five (5) years after the trial drug is approved for marketing or after the termination of the clinical trial.

In addition, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 emphasizes that clinical trial essential documents are important to the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA)'s inspection of the clinical trial. Sponsors, investigators, and clinical trial institutions must confirm that they have appropriate storage conditions for preserving the essential documents. SOPs for document management should be formulated. The source data or its certified copy must be kept complete and readable during the retention period. In addition, the sponsor must ensure that the investigator can always consult and enter data in the case report form (CRF) reported to the sponsor during the trial. The data should not be controlled by the sponsor alone. The photocopies used as source documents should meet the requirements for certified copies. The NMPA-No37-2020 details the essential documents required for clinical trials to prove compliance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020. The NMPA-No74-2020 contains additional requirements on record management during a clinical trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Effective May 1, 2025, the Measures for the Administration of Compliance Audits on Personal Information Protection outline the requirements and processes for both self-initiated and regulator-requested compliance audit activities.

Responsible Parties

For requirements on personal data protection, the PIPL delineates that personal information processors are organizations or individuals who independently determine the purpose and method of processing personal information during personal information processing activities.

Data Protection

Per the PIPL, the personal information processor must ensure the safety of the personal information processed, including following principles of openness and transparency, disclosing personal information processing rules, and clearly indicating the purpose, method, and scope of processing. The PIPL applies to the processing of personal information in China for people located within the country. In addition, the PIPL and the DataSec-Regs apply to data processing activities conducted outside of China involving personal information of people located in China under the following circumstances: (1) where the processing is for the purposes of providing products or services to individuals located in China, (2) where the processing is for analyzing and evaluating the behavior of individuals located in China, or (3) other circumstances stipulated by laws and regulations.

Per the PIPL, the processing of personal information should have a clear and reasonable purpose and should be directly related to the purpose of processing with the least impact on personal rights and interests. The personal information processor must follow the principles of lawfulness, fairness, necessity, and good faith when processing personal information, and must not process personal information through misleading, fraudulent, coercive, and other methods. The collection of personal information must be limited to the minimum scope for the purpose of processing, and personal information must not be collected excessively, while following the principles of openness and transparency. The personal information processor must disclose processing rules and clearly indicate the purpose, method, and scope of processing. When handling personal information, the data quality must be guaranteed, and any inaccuracy and incompleteness of personal information must not adversely affect personal rights and interests. For additional data protection details see the DataSec-Regs, which supplements the PIPL.

The PIPL states that for sensitive personal information, which includes medical health information, the personal information processor must adopt additional protective measures, including informing participants of the necessity of processing sensitive personal information and the impact on personal rights and interests. Unless otherwise provided by laws and administrative regulations, the retention period of personal information must be the shortest time necessary to achieve the processing purpose. Also see the Id-SPI for guidance on identifying sensitive personal information.

Further, the DataSec-Regs states that where a network data processor provides or entrusts other network data processors to process personal information and important data, they must agree to the following:

The recipient of network data must fulfill its obligation to protect network data security and process personal information and important data in accordance with the agreed purpose, method, scope, etc.
If two (2) or more network data processors jointly decide on the purpose and method of processing personal information and important data, they must agree upon their respective rights and obligations.
Per the PIPL and the DataSec-Regs, to send personal information outside of China, the personal information processor must meet one (1) of the following conditions (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Pass the security assessment organized by the national cybersecurity and information department (See below in Data Security)
Conduct personal information protection certification by professional institutions in accordance with the requirements of the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC)
Enter into a contract with the overseas recipient in accordance with the standard contract formulated by the CAC stipulating the rights and obligations of both parties
Other conditions stipulated by laws, administrative regulations, or national cyberspace administration departments
Where China’s international treaties and agreements permit providing personal information to foreign recipients
It is necessary to provide personal information overseas to conclude or perform a contract to which the individual is a part
To implement cross-border human resources management in accordance with labor rules and regulations formulated in accordance with the law and collective contracts signed in accordance with the law, and providing employees' personal information overseas is necessary
It is necessary to provide personal information overseas to perform legal duties or obligations
In an emergency, it is necessary to provide personal information overseas in order to protect the life, health, or property safety of a natural person
The PIPL states that the personal information processor must inform the participant of the name of the foreign recipient, contact information, processing purpose, processing method, and types of personal information. In addition, per the PIPL and the DataSec-Regs, the foreign personal information processor must appoint a representative located in China to be responsible for matters related to personal information protection and report the representative’s contact information to the data protection regulators—the CAC.

The DataScrty requires the personal information processor to manage its data processing activities to ensure data security, promote data development and utilization, protect the legitimate rights and interests of individuals and organizations, and safeguard national sovereignty, security, and development interests. CAC-No11-2022 standardizes requirements for exporting “important data” and personal information to protect the rights and interests of personal information, preserve national security and the societal public interest, and promote the cross-border security and free flow of data. Important data is defined as data that, once tampered with, destroyed, leaked, or illegally obtained or used, might endanger national security, economic operations, social stability, public health, or safety in China. Also see the DataSec-Regs for additional requirements on doing risk assessments and handling and reporting on important data. Personal information processors must conduct security assessments of personal data collected and generated in China before exporting it to overseas data processors. Data export security assessments focus on assessing risks that data export activities may bring to national security, the public interest, or the lawful rights and interests of individuals or organizations. The DataTrsfr-Regs delineates exemptions from the requirements to conduct security assessments, for example in an emergency where it is necessary to provide personal information overseas in order to protect the life, health, or property safety of a natural person. If DataTrsfr-Regs conflicts with CAC-No11-2022, the DataTrsfr-Regs supersede.

When applicable, the DataScrty states that the assessment report must be submitted to CAC through the provincial-level department where the personal information processor is located, and include the following materials:

Declaration form
Self-assessment report on data export risks
Data agreements between the data processor and the overseas recipient
The CAC-No11-2022 states that data export activities that have already been conducted before the implementation of CAC-No11-2022 are noncompliant and must be rectified within six (6) months of the effective date of CAC-No11-2022 (i.e., by March 1, 2023). See the CAC-No11-2022 for additional details on conducting the data export security assessment, the provincial inspections, appeal procedures, and CAC’s review actions and timeline.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

Per the PIPL, personal consent must be made voluntarily and with the participants’ full knowledge of the processing purpose, processing methods, and types of personal information processed. In an emergency, if it is not possible to obtain consent in a timely manner to protect the life, health, property, and safety of participants, the personal information processor must promptly notify the individual after the emergency is eliminated. (Note: consent to data processing is not the same as informed consent to the research described in the Informed Consent topic.) As indicated in the DataSec-Regs, individual consent is defined as specific and unambiguous consent given by an individual for specific processing of their personal information.

The DataSec-Regs supplements the PIPL, adding detailed protection requirements when personal information processing is based on individual consent:

The collection of personal information must not be collected beyond the scope, and personal consent must not be obtained through misleading information, fraud, coercion, etc.
When processing sensitive personal information such as biometrics, religious beliefs, specific identities, and medical health the individual's separate consent must be obtained
When processing the personal information of a minor under the age of 14, the consent of the minor’s parent/legal guardian must be obtained
Personal information must not be processed beyond the purpose, method, type, or retention period of the personal information that the individual has consented to
Processors must not frequently seek consent after an individual has clearly expressed their disagreement with the processing of their personal information
If the purpose, method, or type of personal information processing changes, the individual’s consent must be obtained again
If laws and administrative regulations provide that written consent must be obtained for the processing of sensitive personal information, such provisions must apply
Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Obtaining Consent

In all Chinese clinical trials, a freely given informed consent is required to be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, the RegEthics, and the EC-Guide. In addition, China is implementing the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) as a guidance document. As per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the DAL, the EC-Guide, and CHN-37, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by an ethics committee (EC) and provided to the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) with the clinical trial application. Per the MgmtHumanGen, the ICF must also be provided to the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) (now National Health Commission (NHC)) as part of its application procedures for human genetic resource (HGR) licenses. In addition, per the VaccineLaw, in carrying out a vaccine clinical trial, the investigator is required to obtain a signed ICF from the participant or legal representative/guardian. (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from MOST to NHC, effective May 1, 2024).

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, and CHN-37 state that the investigator, or a person designated by the investigator, must provide detailed research study information to the participant or the legal representative/guardian. As delineated in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, and the EC-Guide, the ICF content should be briefly and clearly presented orally or, in a written language, that is easy to understand, and commensurate with the comprehension level of the research participants. The participant and the legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate. The Measures-Ethics indicates that ICFs must contain sufficient, complete, and accurate information, and be expressed in language, text, video images, and so forth that research participants can understand. Researchers must explain each item to the research participants in accordance with the content of the ICF.

As per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, CHN-37, and the EC-Guide, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or the legal representative/guardian to waive or appear to waive their legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representatives from their liabilities for any negligence. The investigator should give the participant sufficient time to understand the ICF content, and the participant should make a decision whether or not to agree to participate in the study and sign the form. In psychological research, because informed consent may affect the participant’s response to the question, thereby affecting the accuracy of the research results, the investigator can fully inform the participant and obtain informed consent following the project study’s completion.

Per DctrlzCTs-Rare, for decentralized clinical trials of rare diseases, electronic informed consent may be used. When electronic informed consent is used, the informed consent process needs to be recorded, archived, and traceable. For rare disease participants with limited mobility, researchers can use remote informed consent to more quickly and easily obtain consent and ensure that all participants have the latest version in a timely manner. To use electronic informed consent in these scenarios, researchers must conduct evaluation and verification in advance and provide the participants with instructions and training. Before adopting electronic informed consent, the participants should be fully informed of the scope of data collection, access rights, etc. generated during the electronic informed consent process. During the informed consent process, researchers should ensure data security and the privacy of the participants (including their legal representative/guardian) are protected.

Per the MgmtHumanGen, to collect Chinese HGR for a clinical trial, the participant must agree to participate in the clinical trial in writing. Information provided to the participant must be comprehensive, complete, true, accurate, and must not conceal information nor be misleading or deceiving.

For specific consent requirements for human genome editing research, see the Consent for Specimen section.

Re-Consent

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 require investigators to use the latest version of the ICF approved by the EC and, if necessary, participants in the clinical trial process should sign an updated ICF again. If new information may affect the participant’s continued participation in the trial, the investigator must promptly notify the participant and the legal representative/guardian and make corresponding records. Per the RegEthics and the Measures-Ethics, the investigator should obtain re-consent under the following circumstances (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The research plan, scope, and content have changed
Research using previously collected samples that were used for diagnosis and treatment and were labeled with personal identifiable labels
Research using human biological samples or related clinical disease history data with subject-identifiable labels from existing biological sample repositories/databases
The risks related to the research are increased or substantially increased
The level of civil capacity of research participants has been raised
Other changes occur during the research
Language Requirements

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, the RegEthics, and the EC-Guide require the ICF to be presented in oral or written form in a language that the participant is able to understand.

Documenting Consent

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, CHN-37, and the EC-Guide, the participant and the legal representative/guardian, and researchers who perform informed consent, should sign and date the ICF. Per the Measures-Ethics, when the research participants do not have the ability to express their consent in writing, the researcher must obtain their oral informed consent and have audio and video recordings and other process records and supporting materials.

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, CHN-37, and the EC-Guide, if the ICF is not signed by the participant, the relationship should be marked on the form. If the participant and the legal representative/guardian lack the ability to read, an impartial witness must witness the entire informed consent process. The witness should sign and date the ICF after the following steps have occurred:

The written ICF and any other written information to be provided to the participant is read and explained to the participant and the legal representative/guardian
The participant and the legal representative/guardian, have orally consented to the participant’s involvement in the trial, and has signed and dated the ICF, if capable of doing so
Before participating in the study, the participant or the legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF.

Waiver of Consent

The EC-Guide and the RegEthics state that the EC may grant a waiver of informed consent when the following conditions are met (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The risk that the subject may suffer does not exceed the minimum.
The exemption from obtaining the informed consent of the subject does not have a negative impact on the participant’s rights and interests.
The use of human bodily materials or data that can identify the information for research has made it impossible to find the participant, and the research project does not involve personal privacy and commercial interests.
The biological sample donor has signed an ICF agreeing that the donated sample and related information can be used for all medical research.
The exemption requires informed consent and does not mean that it is exempt from the review of the EC.
Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Based on the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, the RegEthics, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study purpose, procedures, and duration of the trial
Any expected risks or discomforts to the participant
Any expected benefits to the participant; if no benefit is expected, the participant should be informed of this point
The participant’s responsibilities
The approximate number of participants involved in the trial
Those aspects of the trial that are experimental
Treatment available to the participant as well as important potential risks and benefits associated with this treatment
The alternative procedure(s) or course(s) of treatment that may be available to the participant, and their important potential benefits and risks
The nature, form, and extent of compensation for participation
Any expenses the participant needs to pay to participate in the trial
The extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained, and a statement that, when necessary, the sponsor, the ethics committee (EC), the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA), and drug authorities in the provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities may be required to review participant data
The scope and method of use of research data and research participants' personal data, and whether sharing and secondary use are carried out
Any treatment and corresponding compensation the participant can expect to receive in the event of a trial-related injury
The participant’s rights, including that participation is voluntary, and that the participant can withdraw from the study at any time without penalty or loss of benefits, including medical treatment, to which the participant is otherwise entitled
Precautions and protective measures for the participant before, during, and after the research
The foreseeable circumstances and/or reasons under which the participant's participation in the trial may be terminated
Contact information for the sponsor and investigator in the event of participant problems or injuries related to the trial
Basic information about the researcher and qualification of research institution
That records identifying the participant will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and/or regulations, will not be made publicly available. If the results of the trial are published, the participant’s identity will remain confidential
Whether the results of the study will be provided to the research participants
That the participant or the legally acceptable representative will be informed in a timely manner if information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial
When appropriate, the EC may require the following additional information: whether the research may put the participant at risk but the risk is not currently foreseeable; researchers can terminate a participant’s participation in the study without their consent; new major discoveries during the research will be provided to the participant; and whether there is a potential conflict of interest
If applicable, how biological samples will be handled
Per the MgmtHumanGen, to collect Chinese human genetic resources (HGR) for a clinical trial, the investigator must provide advance information to the participant on the purpose of collection, the possible health impact, the protection measures of personal privacy, their participation is voluntary, and they have the right to withdraw unconditionally at any time.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Overview

In accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (CHN-84), principles set forth in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), China’s ethics standards safeguard the rights of research participants. Participants also have the right to receive the nationally available standard of health care, and the right to report any trial-related injuries or issues to the investigator(s) and the ethics committee (EC). The RegEthics states that the EC must protect the legitimate rights and interests of the participants, safeguarding their dignity, and promoting the development of biomedical research norms. As indicated in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the EC-Guide, and the RegEthics, a participant’s rights must be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process. (See the Required Elements; Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.) See CHN-26 for an analysis of clinical trial participants’ rights in China.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, the RegEthics, and CHN-37, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As delineated in the Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the RegEthics, and CHN-37, a potential research participant or the legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per the Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, the RegEthics, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, and CHN-37, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 also states that it is the responsibility of the investigator(s) to safeguard the confidentiality of research data to protect the identity and records of research participants.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, and CHN-37 state that the research participant or the legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the investigator(s) and the EC to address trial-related inquiries and/or to appeal against a violation of the participant’s rights. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 state that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
The EC-Guide states that during an emergency, clinical studies on human participants must not be conducted without prior review and approval by the ethics committee (EC). Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), in an emergency, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) has not been obtained from the research participant or the legal representative/guardian, or if an effective treatment is lacking, but the investigational product could save the participant’s life, recover health, or alleviate pain, the clinical trial may be conducted. However, the method used on the participant must be explained clearly in the trial protocol as well as the relevant trial documentation, and the EC must approve the protocol in advance. The participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible, and consent to continue and other consent should be requested, as appropriate.

During an outbreak of an epidemic, the EC-Guide advises ECs to adhere to the highest scientific and ethical standards for independent review of the research project to ensure balancing of quality and timeliness. The materials provided by the researcher can be simplified according to the situation. The EC should pay special attention to the informed consent process as participants may be improperly exploited due to their obvious vulnerability, especially when it involves high-risk and risk-uncertain research. It should be ensured that participants choose to participate voluntarily and independently after being fully informed and fully understanding the possible risks of research. Research participants or the legal representative/guardian must be allowed to withdraw from research unconditionally at any stage.

See the EC-Guide for additional guidance on the EC review when there is a major epidemic risk.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Overview

As per the EC-Guide, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), in all Chinese clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. The EC-Guide and the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 define vulnerable persons as those who are relatively (or absolutely) incapable of safeguarding their interests, and consequently, are usually incapable of giving consent or refusing to give consent due to the restriction on their capacities or freedoms. These populations include people with low socioeconomic status and low education levels. The EC-Guide also defines vulnerability to include the following areas: economic, institutional fragility, cognitive, social, medical treatment, and compliance. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 also include members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable subjects include persons in nursing homes, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, which upholds the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki (CHN-84) and the RegEthics, both require special attention to be provided to those participants who cannot give or refuse to give consent for themselves, and for those who will not benefit personally from the research. As per RegEthics, this population includes children, pregnant women, mentally impaired persons, and people with mental disorders. Also, the Measures-Ethics requires special protection for research participants involving specific groups, such as children, pregnant women, the elderly, persons with intellectual and mental disabilities. In addition, special attention should be paid to studies involving fertilized eggs, embryos, fetuses, or those that may be affected by assisted reproductive technologies.

Note: The EC-Guide clarifies that special protections for vulnerable populations must not mean that they are excluded during the recruitment process. Vulnerable people should also benefit from research and be encouraged to participate in clinical research.

For additional information, see the Children/Minors and Mentally Impaired sections. In addition, see CHN-26 for an analysis of clinical trial participants’ rights in China.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
As per MPL, minors refer to citizens who are under the age of 18.

In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), when the research participant is a child, the informed consent form (ICF) must be signed by the child’s parent/legal guardian. If the child can decide whether to participate, the ICF should also be approved by the child. The age of consent for children and minors is not defined in the currently available regulatory resources. See CHN-26 for an analysis of clinical trial participants’ rights in China.

Per NMPA-No11-2017, clinical trials may be conducted on children depending on existing knowledge of and extrapolation by research results in adults. Drugs that are intended for use in children should be evaluated in the appropriate age group for children and start in the high-age group followed by the low-age group. The EC-Guide stipulates the following conditions when children can participate in research:

Only when it is shown that the research may be aimed at the prevention and mitigation of serious problems that affect the health and well-being of children
Research that does not exceed the minimum risk
Research that moderately exceeds the minimum risk, but is expected to directly benefit the child participants
Research that moderately exceeds the minimum risk limit, but children may benefit from a population of participants
Per DctrlzCTs-Rare, for decentralized clinical trials of rare diseases, electronic informed consent may be used with children. Since rare diseases often occur in childhood, the use of multimedia interactive modes, such as video, audio, and charts, in the informed consent process will be more conducive to the understanding of child participants and help them to be fully informed.

Assent Requirements

No information is currently available regarding assent requirements for children or minors.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
While RegEthics lists pregnant women as a vulnerable population, there are no relevant provisions regarding any special consent procedures for pregnant women, fetuses, or neonates.

Per NMPA-No11-2017, any research studies of pregnant women should include a follow-up evaluation of these participants during pregnancy, as well as the fetuses and the children from that pregnancy. If a research study is intended for lactating women, the researchers should test the secretion of the drug or its metabolites in human milk, if feasible. If lactating women are recruited into a clinical trial, the effects of the drug on their infants should be monitored and, if necessary, followed. Pregnant women should be excluded from any research study if the investigational product is not intended for use during pregnancy. In this case, if a pregnancy occurs during the clinical trial, the study should be terminated and reported to the ethics committee for follow-up and evaluation of the pregnancy, fetus, and child.

In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), informed consent requirements for conducting clinical trials with pregnant or nursing women or fetuses follow the general requirements listed in the Required Elements section. Specifically, the informed consent form should include a statement on the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) list prisoners as a vulnerable population. Per CHN-37, because incarceration could affect their ability to make a voluntary decision regarding participation in research. A research study involving prisoners should ensure that these prospective participants are informed and are given the opportunity to make their own decisions without any interference from a higher authority. The ethics committee must also ensure that the study will be independently monitored to assure the dignity and rights of the prisoners involved in the research. In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37, informed consent requirements for conducting clinical trials with prisoners should follow the general requirements listed in the Required Elements section.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
While the RegEthics lists mentally impaired people as a vulnerable population, there are no relevant provisions regarding any special consent procedures for them. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) allow the ethics committee to approve the participation of research participants who are incompetent, or mentally or physically incapable of giving consent under certain conditions. The informed consent form must be signed and dated by the participant’s legal representative/guardian.

Per DctrlzCTs-Rare, for decentralized clinical trials of rare diseases, electronic informed consent may be used with mentally impaired people. For some rare disease patients with cognitive impairment (such as neurodevelopmental dyslexia) or writing disorders (such as primary hereditary dystonia), the legal representative/guardian can help introduce the material to better protect the rights and interests of participants.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
As delineated in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, investigational products (IPs) are defined as experimental and reference drugs used in a clinical trial.

The International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) define an IP as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes a product with a marketing authorization when it is used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form, when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Manufacturing

According to the DAL and the NMPA-No28-2020, the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) in China. See CHN-11 for an analysis of the authorization procedure for manufacturing drugs in China.

Per the DAL and the NMPA-No28-2020, the holder of the drug registration certificate must obtain a drug production license (found at NMPA-No72-2019) to produce a drug or entrust a pharmaceutical production enterprise to produce it. If an entrusted production enterprise is used, the drug registration certificate holder and the entrusted production enterprise must sign an entrustment agreement and a quality agreement. Blood products, narcotic drugs, psychotropic drugs, medical toxic drugs, and pharmaceutical precursor chemicals cannot be entrusted to a pharmaceutical production enterprise for production, unless otherwise stipulated by the NMPA. The DAL states that the drug production license must indicate the validity period and production scope, and must be reviewed and reissued upon expiration. Per the NMPA-No28-2020, a drug production license is valid for five (5) years; an application for a new drug production license must be submitted to the original issuing authority six (6) months before the expiration.

As delineated in the DAL and the NMPA-No28-2020, the following conditions must be met for drug manufacturing:

Pharmacy technicians, engineering, technical personnel, and skilled workers have been qualified according to law
Sanitary plants and facilities are compatible with the production of pharmaceuticals
Institutions, personnel, and equipment are capable of quality management and inspection of the produced drugs
Rules and regulations are in place to ensure the quality of pharmaceuticals and compliance with quality management requirements
Specific guidance on drugs manufactured for clinical trials is provided in NMPA-No43-2022 (an annex to the NMPA-GMP), which states that the preparation and quality control of drugs for clinical trials must follow the requirements in the NMPA-GMP; minimize the risks of contamination, cross-contamination, confusion, and errors in the manufacturing process; and ensure the quality of clinical trial IPs to protect the safety of clinical trial participants. See NMPA-No43-2022 for detailed manufacturing requirements, including the quality management system, personnel, facilities and equipment, material management, file management, and management of the control drug.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 specifies that the manufacture of clinical trial drugs must meet the relevant requirements for quality management. See NMPA-GMP, NMPA-No43-2022, NMPA-No28-2020, NMPA-No13-2015, and NMPA-No28-2016 for guidance on the quality management system during manufacturing. Per the DRR and the NMPA-No28-2020, the Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) makes a risk-based decision on whether to initiate an on-site inspection of drug production based on the registered varieties, processes, facilities, and previous acceptance verification. However, on-site inspections must be conducted for innovative drugs, improved new drugs, and biological products.

The International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) also requires IPs to be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable good manufacturing practices and used in accordance with the approved protocol.

Import

The DAL provides that prior to IP import, an NMPA import drug license must be obtained for each IP. Per CHN-18, before each import, the import agent must file for a record with the local agency at the port of entry, which issues a customs clearance notice of imported drugs and port inspection notice of imported drugs. According to CHN-28, importers must apply for the drug import license via the China International Trade Single Window online platform (CHN-2). For IP shipments, only a party authorized under the corresponding clinical trial approval can register and apply for the drug import license.

Per NMPA-No75-2020, there is a one-time fee of 2,000 Yuan for the import of drugs.

Pursuant to the NMPA-No35-2017, researchers can conduct Phase I of multi-regional clinical trials (MRCT) of imported IPs and therapeutic biological products (excluding vaccines) simultaneously in China.

As per NMPA-No52-2018, clinical trial and drug registration applications for imported new drugs or therapeutic biological products using trial data generated entirely overseas do not need to be registered first in their own country in order to enter China. This removes the need to conduct local clinical trials in addition to existing overseas research. Overseas clinical trial data may be acceptable for direct China registration provided that:

The data is reliable, authenticated, and complies with CHN-37
The data can assess the efficacy and safety for the target indication
There are no ethnic sensitivities to Chinese local populations influencing efficacy and safety
The data meets China drug registration requirements
See the NMPA-No52-2018 for additional details on the review and approval of overseas clinical trial data. For more information on application requirements, see the Submission Process and Submission Content sections.

Per NMPA-No230-2015 and CHN-18, the NMPA will prioritize the review and approval of foreign innovative drugs manufactured in China and drugs manufactured at a United States (U.S.) or European Union facility, and are simultaneously under review for marketing authorization by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or the European Medicines Agency.

Please note: China is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (CHN-30), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see CHN-55.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Investigator’s Brochure

In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), the sponsor is responsible for providing the investigators with an Investigator’s Brochure (IB). The IB must contain all of the relevant information on the investigational product(s) (IPs) including chemical, pharmaceutical, toxicological, pharmacological, and clinical information and data on the IP, including trials already completed or being conducted in other places.

As specified in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37, the IB must provide coverage of the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation parameters
Pharmaceutical aspects
Pharmacokinetics and metabolism
Toxicological effects in any animal species tested under a single dose study, a repeated dose study, or a special study
Results of clinical pharmacokinetic studies
Information regarding safety, pharmacodynamics, efficacy, and dose responses obtained from prior clinical trials in humans
See the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 for detailed IB content guidelines.

Quality Management

Per the DAL, drug manufacturers are required to abide by quality management regulations, establish and improve the quality management system for drug production, and ensure that the entire process meets statutory requirements, including good manufacturing practice (GMP) standards in the NMPA-GMP and NMPA-No43-2022 (an annex to the NMPA-GMP). With respect to the manufacture of the clinical trial IP, NMPA-No43-2022 states that the manufacturing facility must establish a quality management system based on risks and a document system to ensure the effective operation of the quality management system. The sponsor must audit and confirm the quality management system of the entrusted manufacturing facility and sign an entrustment agreement and a quality agreement to clearly define the responsibilities of all parties to ensure that the clinical trial drug meets the intended use and quality requirements. Changes that may affect the safety of clinical trial drugs, such as changes in the preparation site, prescription process, batch size, quality standards, key raw and auxiliary materials, packaging materials of clinical trial drugs, and technology transfer, must be evaluated. Changes and assessments should be documented. Deviations from the preparation process, quality standards, and other deviations that may affect the quality of drugs for clinical trials should be investigated and evaluated, and corresponding records should be kept.

Per the DRR, when reviewing the application, the CDE will conduct an associated review of the chemical raw materials, auxiliary materials, and packaging materials and containers used in direct contact with the pharmaceutical preparations. The CDE makes a risk-based decision on whether to initiate an on-site inspection based on the registered varieties, processes, facilities, and previous acceptance verification. For innovative drugs, improved new drugs, and biological products, on-site verification of drug registration manufacturing and inspection of pre-market drug manufacturing quality management must be conducted. If manufacturing verification is required, the applicant and the drug regulatory department of the province, autonomous region, or municipality directly under the Central Government where the applicant or manufacturer is located will be informed. The National Institutes for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC) (also referred to as the Procuratorate), or the drug inspection agency designated by the NMPA, will conduct the inspections and testing, as needed. The drug registration inspection of overseas-produced drugs must be implemented by the port drug inspection agency.

Per CHN-37, the sponsor must maintain a Certificate of Analysis to document the identity, purity, and strength of the IP(s) to be used in the clinical trial.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Investigational product (IP) labeling in China must comply with the requirements set forth in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the ProvLabel, the DAL, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37). The name, insert sheet, and label of any drug for which registration is applied must comply with the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA)’s requirements as mandated in the preceding regulations.

As per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the sponsor is responsible for ensuring the proper packaging and labeling of the IPs. The IPs, comparator, and placebo products must be labeled in conformity with the clinical protocol, and be easily recognizable, correctly coded, and marked with special labels indicating that the product is to be used for clinical trial purposes. For international multicenter clinical trials, NMPA-No2-2015 states that the label content of drugs should be complete and meet the requirements of the country or region where they are located to ensure the identification, traceability, and correct use of drugs. The label content should include clinical trial information and clinical trial drug information, as detailed below.

Per NMPA-No43-2022 (an annex to the NMPA-GMP), to ensure the accuracy of IP labeling for clinical trials, operating procedures should be established that include measures to prevent mislabeling, such as balance calculation of label quantity, site clearance, and intermediate control inspection by trained personnel. Where blinded trials are involved, effective measures should also be taken to prevent labeling errors between the test drug and the reference drug (including placebo). For operations that need to remove the original product labels and packaging, corresponding measures should be taken to prevent contamination, cross-contamination, confusion, and errors between the test drug and the reference drug (including placebo). IP labels for clinical trial use must be clear and easy to identify, and contain the following contents:

The sponsor of the clinical trial
The name of the drug used in the clinical trial
The batch number and/or serial number of the product and the packaging operation (the label information of the clinical trial IP used for the blinded test should be able to remain blinded)
The clinical trial number or other unique code corresponding to the clinical trial
The words "only for clinical trials" or similar instructions
Validity period, expressed in a way such as XXXX (year)/XX (month)/XX (day) or XXXX (year)/XX (month) that can clearly indicate the year, month, and day
Specifications and instructions for use (the instructions for use or other written instructions provided to the participants may be attached, and the content should meet the requirements of the clinical trial protocol)
Packaging specifications
Storage conditions
If the clinical trial drug is allowed to be taken home by the subjects, it must be specially marked to avoid misuse
NMPA-No43-2022 states that the inner and outer packaging must contain all of the label contents. If the size of the inner package label is too small to indicate all of the above contents, at least the first four (4) label contents in the bulleted list above must be included. If the validity period needs to be changed, the IP must be affixed with an additional label, and the additional label must be marked with the new validity period. The original batch number or drug code must not be overwritten when affixing additional labels. After the applicant's evaluation, the additional label operation of changing the validity period can be carried out in the institution conducting the clinical trial. The operation of affixing additional labels must be carried out in accordance with the operating procedures approved by the sponsor. Personnel must be trained and approved in these operating procedures, and the operation site must be reviewed and confirmed by personnel. Attachment of additional labels should be properly documented and traceable in clinical trial-related documents or batch records. The sponsor must conduct a quality review of the IPs with additional labels.

The ProvLabel and the DAL also provide labeling information that should be included on the outer packaging and immediate container of all drugs to be registered in China. (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements.)

Adopted name in China
Instructions
Generic name
License holder and their address
Indications or functions
Strength, dosage, and usage
Production date and batch number
Expiration (Should be marked as one (1) day or one (1) month earlier than the actual expiration date, depending on whether the date is labeled to a specific day or month)
Manufacturer and their address
Ingredients
Adverse reactions
Contraindications and precautions
Storage information
Approval number
Labels and instructions for narcotic, psychotropic, medical toxic, radioactive, external, and non-prescription drugs must be printed with the prescribed marks
The label language must also be scientific, standardized, and accurate, and written in standard Chinese characters published by the National Language Commission. See ProvLabel and the DAL for detailed labeling instructions.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 state that the IP must be coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable.

(See Product Management section for additional information on IP labeling requirements).

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

Per NMPA-No43-2022, operating procedures should be established to ensure the accuracy of packaging investigational products (IPs) for clinical trials. The packaging of IPs for clinical trials should prevent and avoid its deterioration, contamination, damage, and errors during storage and transportation. The procedures should identify activities that open or change the packaging. The test drug and the reference drug are usually not allowed to be packaged in the same packaging line at the same time. For clinical trial IPs that need to be packaged simultaneously on the same packaging line, appropriate operating procedures and equipment should be in place, and relevant operators should be trained to avoid confusion and errors.

Further, NMPA-No43-2022 states that before approving the release of an IP for a clinical trial, the person responsible must evaluate the quality of each batch of IPs to ensure that they comply with laws, regulations, and technical requirements, including:

Batch records
Deviations and changes, subsequent investigations, and assessments
Correct packaging and labels
Production conditions
Status of facilities, equipment, preparation process, and inspection method
The release of raw and auxiliary materials and the inspection results of intermediate and finished products
The relevant test results of the reference drug (including placebo) (if applicable)
Stability study data and trends (if applicable)
Storage conditions
Qualification certificate of reference substance/standard product (if applicable)
Audit report of the quality management system of the entrusted unit (if applicable)
Proof of legal origin of the reference drug (if applicable)
Other requirements related to the quality of the batch of clinical trial drugs
As per NMPA-No43-2022, the delivery of IPs must be carried out according to the sponsor’s delivery instructions and specific requirements. The sponsor must select an appropriate transportation method according to the packaging, quality attributes, and storage requirements of the IP, take corresponding measures to prevent deterioration, damage, pollution, temperature control failure, etc., and confirm the IP is sent to designated clinical trial institutions. The IPs delivered to the clinical trial institutions must at least be accompanied by a certificate of conformity, a delivery list, and a receipt confirmation from the research institution. IPs must not be directly transferred from a clinical trial institution to another clinical trial institution. If necessary, the sponsor and the clinical trial institutions of both parties should have complete quality assessment and operating procedures for the transfer of IPs, which can only be implemented after full assessment and approval by the sponsor.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 states that the sponsor must provide the IPs to investigators and clinical trial institutions. The sponsor must not provide the IPs until the clinical trial has obtained the approval of the ethics committee and the approval or filing of the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA). The sponsor must provide the investigator and the clinical trial institution with a written description of the IP, including directions for use and storage. Further, the sponsor must formulate procedures for the supply and management, including reception, storage, distribution, use, and recovery. The sponsor must ensure that the IPs are delivered to researchers and clinical trial institutions in a timely manner. The sponsor must also take measures to ensure the stability of the trial drug during the trial period. Investigators and clinical trial institutions are responsible for the management of IPs provided by the sponsor. They must assign qualified pharmacists or other personnel to manage IPs.

CHN-37 provides additional guidance that the sponsor must ensure:

IP product quality
IP manufactured according to good manufacturing practice (GMP), as per NMPA-GMP and NMPA-No43-2022
Proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP in accordance with the protocol, and special marking to indicate that the drug is specifically to be used in a clinical trial
IP use record which includes information on the quantity, loading, shipment, receipt, dispensing and handling, and the reclamation and destruction of the unused drug
Establishment of IP management and filing systems
Acceptable storage temperatures, conditions, and times for the IP
Timely delivery of the IP
Refer to the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 for detailed sponsor-related IP requirements.

Per the DAL, the sponsor—also referred to as the holder of a drug registration certificate—must establish a drug release procedure that includes reviewing the drug to ensure compliance with national drug standards, and releasing it only after the quality attorney signs it. Further, drug license holders, pharmaceutical production enterprises, and medical institutions must establish and implement a drug traceability system, in accordance with regulations.

Record Requirements

Per NMPA-No43-2022 (an appendix to NMPA-GMP), sponsors should set up investigational drug files, which are documents and records of the preparation, packaging, quality inspection, the release of products in batches, delivery, and transportation. These files should be retained until at least two (2) years after the IP is withdrawn from the market, or at least two (2) years after the termination of the clinical trial or the registration application if the IP fails to get marketing authorization. The files should at least contain the known or potential key quality attributes and key process parameters in the research stage, re-evaluated with the development of the product, and updated when necessary. The files can be the original documents or certified copies.

Per NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the sponsor must keep records of the transportation, receipt, distribution, recovery, and destruction of the IPs; establish a recycling management system to ensure the recall of defective products and recovery after the clinical trial and expiration; and establish a disposal system. The entire management process of all IPs must be documented. Finally, the retained samples must be kept until the end of the clinical trial or the time limit required by relevant laws and regulations, whichever time period is longer. If the two (2) are inconsistent, the longer period must be used. The sponsor must keep clinical trial records for at least five (5) years after the IP is approved for marketing.

In addition, as indicated in NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, there must be clear documentation of the IP’s quality evaluation, such as approval for release, non-release or other decisions, and must be signed by the person responsible for release. Before the IP is shipped to the clinical trial institution, the sponsor must confirm the following contents and keep relevant records:

The IP has been approved for release
The relevant requirements necessary for the initiation of clinical trials have been met, such as the approval or consent of the ethics committee and the NMPA
Inspection and confirmation of transportation conditions
Per NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, complete written records should be kept for the delivery of IPs, which usually include the name or code of the IP, dosage form, strength, batch number or drug code, quantity, expiration date, applicant, preparation unit, packaging form, and storage requirements. Records should also be kept of the receiving unit and address, contact information, shipping date, transportation method, and the temperature monitoring measures. If the transportation is entrusted to a third-party carrier, the relevant information of the carrier shall also be included. The content of the shipping record can be adjusted as needed for blinding.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

The term “specimen” is not referenced within China. However, as per MgmtHumanGen and the HGR-AppGuide, human genetic resources (HGR) are defined as including both human genetic resource materials and human genetic resource information. HGR materials refer to genetic materials, such as organs, tissues, and cells, which contain the human genome, genes, and their products. The HGR-AppGuide further elaborates that HGR includes all types of cells, whole blood, tissues/tissue sections, semen, cerebrospinal fluid, pleural/peritoneal effusions, blood/bone marrow smears, hair (with hair follicles), etc., but do not include other human secretions, body fluids, swabs, etc. that do not contain cells. HGR information refers to data and other information materials generated using HGR materials, including nucleic acid sequence information such as human genes, genomes, transcriptomes, and epigenomes, as well as information materials such as diseases associated with them, but does not include simple clinical data, imaging data, protein data, and metabolic data.

The Measures-Ethics defines "human or human biological samples" as the human body itself, including human cells, tissues, organs, body fluids, flora, etc., as well as fertilized eggs, embryos, and fetuses.

The Rules-MgmtHGR clarifies that HGR information includes information materials such as human genes and genome data generated using HGR materials. It does not include clinical data, imaging data, protein data, and metabolic data.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Import

Per the QuarantineLaw, the AQSIQ-No160, and CHN-54, imports of human tissue, biological products, blood, and hemoproducts are subject to health and quarantine inspection. The importer is required to declare the items for inspection with local offices governed by the General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine (AQSIQ). As described in CHN-46, AQSIQ operates 35 Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureaus (CIQ) in China’s 31 provinces.

Per the AQSIQ-No160, the management of special articles is subject to risk control, which includes quarantine approval, inspection, and supervision as per risk levels upon assessment. Importers of special articles must apply for the quarantine approval by submitting the following documents to the local CIQ:

A completed Application for Quarantine of Inbound/Outbound Special Articles (CHN-54)
Specific descriptions of the special articles, including Chinese and English names, classification, composition, origin, purpose, import destination, etc.
Approval documents from health authorities for inbound human blood, plasma, tissue, organs, cells, bone marrow, etc.
For first-time importers, provide copies of the business license and the organization code certificate (copied)
For first-time importers, firm information including management system certification status, address, place of production, laboratory setup, storage facilities, processing conditions, production processes, floor plan, etc.
For first-time importers, biosafety documents including storage management rules, use management rules, waste disposal rules, professional management rules, emergency handling procedures, etc.
In addition, see QuarantineRules for more details on the procedures for the inspection and quarantine processes, the jurisdiction of AQSIQ and its local branches, and different levels of sample testing based on risk and the importer’s track record.

Export

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024. The SC-Order777 amends the MgmtHumanGen to reflect the transfer of HGR management from MOST to the NHC, but the Bioscrty-Law has not yet been amended to reflect the transfer).

The MgmtHumanGen and the Bioscrty-Law prohibit foreign entities or individuals from collecting or preserving China’s HGR in China, or providing Chinese HGR for use abroad except under prescribed conditions to carry out scientific research activities, which must be conducted through collaboration with Chinese scientific research institutions, higher education institutions, medical institutions, or enterprises. Per the MgmtHumanGen, the foreign entity and the Chinese entity must jointly file an application for approval to MOST (now the NHC), and the research must pass an ethics review in the countries (regions) where the partners are located. The only exception to the approval requirement is international collaborations in clinical trials that do not involve the export of Chinese HGR materials such as organs, tissues, or cells comprising the human genome, genes, and their products. Such clinical trial collaborations, however, must be filed with MOST (now the NHC) on its online platform (CHN-6), which will generate a record number. See HGR-WorkUpdt for information on CHN-6. Per HGR-InfoSys, for help with CHN-6, contact Zhu Min, NHC’s China Biotechnology Development Center, at 010-88225151 or 010-88225168; or the information system support at 17610386080.

As delineated in MgmtHumanGen, the applicant may apply for the export license separately, or with the application for international cooperative research. (See Regulatory Authority and Clinical Trial Lifecycle topics for details on MOST’s (now the NHC’s) review and approval requirements for HGR collection and international cooperative research license applications.) To apply for an export license, follow the instructions at NHC’s online platform (CHN-6).

Material Transfer Agreement

Per the Measures-Ethics, where establishments cooperate with enterprises and other institutions to carry out life science and medical research involving humans, or provide human biological samples and information data for enterprises and other institutions carrying out life science and medical research involving humans, the institutions must fully understand the overall situation of the research, clarify the scope of use and handling methods of biological samples and information data through agreements subject to ethics review and follow-up review, and supervise their proper disposal after the research is completed.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024).

As delineated in the MgmtHumanGen and the Rules-MgmtHGR, MOST (now the NHC), through its experts, is responsible for reviewing and approving license applications to collect HGR and conduct international collaborative projects using Chinese HGR. The applicant’s submission for these licenses must include the written informed consent of the provider of the HGR. The Rules-MgmtHGR states that the written informed consent must ensure that the lawful rights and interests of providers of HGR are not infringed.

Per the MgmtHumanGen, to collect Chinese HGR for a clinical trial, the investigator must provide advance information to the participant on the purpose of collection, the possible impact on health, the protection of personal privacy, their participation is voluntary, and they have the right to withdraw unconditionally at any time. The participant must agree in writing. Information provided to the participant must be comprehensive, complete, true, accurate, and must not conceal information nor be misleading or deceiving.

The Measures-Ethics indicates that for the collection of biological samples involving humans, the informed consent must include the type, quantity, use, preservation, and utilization of biological samples (including whether they are directly used for product development, sharing, and secondary use), privacy protection, external provision, and destruction and disposal.

Consent for Human Genome Editing Research

As required in the GeneEdit-Ethics, human genome editing research should obtain clear and effective informed consent from research participants. The content of the informed consent form and the process of obtaining informed consent should be standardized and effective. If it is found that the risk may increase during the research process, the explicit informed consent of the research participants should be obtained again. If the research participant is a person without civil capacity, the consent of the legal representative/guardian should be obtained. If the research participant is a person with limited civil capacity, both the consent of the legal representative/guardian and the research participant should be obtained. Research participants can withdraw from genome-editing research unconditionally at any stage.

Requirements
(Legislation) Biosecurity Law of the People's Republic of China (Bioscrty-Law – Standard Chinese) (Effective April 15, 2021)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) Data Security Law of the People’s Republic of China (DataScrty - Standard Chinese) (Effective September 1, 2021)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) Drug Administration Law of the People's Republic of China (DAL – Standard Chinese) (Effective December 1, 2019)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) Minors Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China (MPL – Standard Chinese) (Effective June 1, 2021)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) Personal Information Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China (PIPL) (Effective November 1, 2021)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) Rules for the Implementation of Frontier Health and Quarantine Law of the People’s Republic of China (QuarantineLaw – Standard Chinese) (Last amended March 2, 2019)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) State Council Institutional Reform Plan (SC-IRP – Standard Chinese) (March 17, 2018)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) Vaccine Administration Law (VaccineLaw – Standard Chinese) (Effective December 1, 2019)
National People’s Congress
(Regulation) Adjusting the Review and Approval Procedures for Drug Clinical Trials (No. 50 of 2018) (NMPA-No50-2018 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No50-2018 – Google Translation) (July 24, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Data Export Security Assessment Measures (No. 11) (CAC-No11-2022 – Standard Chinese) (Effective September 1, 2022)
Cyberspace Administration of China
(Regulation) Decision Concerning the Adjustment of the Administration of Imported Drug Registration (No. 35 of 2017) (NMPA-No35-2017 – Standard Chinese) (Effective October 10, 2017)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Decision of the State Council on Amending Some Administrative Regulations (Decree No. 709) (RegImplemDAL-Amndt – Standard Chinese) (Effective March 2, 2019)
State Council
(Regulation) Detailed Implementation Rules on the Management of Human Genetic Resources (No. 21) (Rules-MgmtHGR – Standard Chinese) (Effective July 1, 2023)
Ministry of Science and Technology
(Regulation) Drug Clinical Trial Registration and Information Disclosure Management Standards (No. 9 of 2020) (NMPA-No9-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No9-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Drug Registration Management Measures (Order No. 27) (DRR – Standard Chinese) (Effective July 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Ethical Review Measures for Life Sciences and Medical Research Involving Humans (Measures-Ethics – Standard Chinese) (February 18, 2023)
National Health Commission, Ministry of Education, and Ministry of Science and Technology
(Regulation) Health and Quarantine Regulations for the Entry and Exit of Special Items (AQSIQ-No160 - Standard Chinese) (Effective March 1, 2015)
General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection & Quarantine
(Regulation) Implementation of Electronic Submission of Drug Registration Applications (No. 110 of 2022) (NMPA-No110-2022 – Standard Chinese) (November 30, 2022)
National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Management Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Process (No. 437 of 2017) (QuarantineRules - Standard Chinese) (Effective November 1, 2017)
General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection & Quarantine
(Regulation) Management Measures for Communication and Exchange of Drug R&D and Technical Review (No. 48 of 2020) (NMPA-No48-2020 - Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No48-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective December 10, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Management Regulations for Safety Update Reports During Research and Development (No. 7 of 2020) (NMPA-No7-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No7-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Measures for Ethical Review of Biomedical Research Involving Humans (RegEthics – Standard Chinese) (Effective December 1, 2016)
National Health Commission
(Regulation) Measures for the Management of Clinical Research Projects Carried Out by Medical and Health Institutions (NHC-ClinProjMgmt - Standard Chinese) (Effective October 16, 2014)
National Health Commission
(Regulation) Measures for the Supervision and Inspection of Drug Clinical Trial Institutions (No. 56 of 2023) (NMPA-No56-2023 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No56-2023 – Google Translate) (Effective March 1, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Notice on the Promotion and Implementation of the Vaccine Administration Law (No. 32 of 2019) (NMPA-No32-2019 – Standard Chinese) (July 25, 2019)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Opinions on Deepening the Reform of the Review and Approval System to Encourage Innovation in Drugs and Medical Devices (No. 42 of 2017) (SC-Opinions-No42 – Standard Chinese) (October 8, 2017)
Chinese Communist Party’s Central Committee and State Council
(Regulation) Opinions on Reforming the Review and Approval System for Drugs and Medical Devices (No. 44 of 2015) (SC-Opinions-No44 – Standard Chinese) (August 9, 2015)
State Council
(Regulation) Opinions on Strengthening the Ethical Governance of Science and Technology (SC-EthicalGov – Standard Chinese) (March 20, 2022)
State Council
(Regulation) Optimization of Drug Registration Review and Approval (No. 23 of 2018) (NMPA-No23-2018 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No23-2018 – Google Translation) (Effective May 17, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation, and the National Health Commission
(Regulation) Pharmacovigilance Quality Management Standards (No. 65 of 2021) (NMPA-No65-2021 - Standard Chinese) (Effective December 1, 2021)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Provisions on the Functional Configuration, Internal Structure and Staffing of the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA-Org – Standard Chinese) (Effective July 29, 2018)
State Council
(Regulation) Provisions on the Functional Configuration, Internal Structure and Staffing of the State Administration for Market Regulation (SAMR-Org – Standard Chinese) (Effective July 30, 2018)
State Council
(Regulation) Provisions to Promote and Regulate Cross-border Data Flows (No. 16) (DataTrsfr-Regs – Standard Chinese) (Effective March 22, 2024)
Cyberspace Administration of China
(Regulation) Re-issuance of Drug Registration Fee Standards (No. 75 of 2020) (NMPA-No75-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No75-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Regulations for the Implementation of the Drug Administration Law of the People’s Republic of China (Decree No. 360) (RegImplemDAL – Standard Chinese)(Effective September 15, 2002) (Last amended March 2, 2019)
State Council
(Regulation) Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the Administration of Human Genetic Resources (No. 717) (MgmtHumanGen – Standard Chinese) (Effective July 1, 2019)
State Council
(Regulation) Regulations on the Administration of Drug Clinical Trial Institutions (No. 101 of 2019) (NMPA-NHC-No101-2019 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-NHC-No101-2019 – Google Translation) (Effective December 1, 2019)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation, and the National Health Commission
(Regulation) Safety Information Assessment and Management Standards During Drug Clinical Trials (No. 5 of 2020) (NMPA-No5-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No5-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Several Policies for Drug Registration, Review, and Approval (No. 230 of 2015) (NMPA-No230-2015 – Standard Chinese) (Effective November 11, 2015)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Standards for Submission and Review of Drug Clinical Trial Plans (No. 51 of 2023) (NMPA-No51-2023 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No51-2023 – Google Translation) (October 12, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Pharmacological Research of Biosimilars (No. 17 of 2022) (NMPA-No17-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No17-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective February 8, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Technical Requirements for Pharmaceutical Research and Evaluation of Chemical Drugs Marketed Overseas But Not Marketed in China (No. 21 of 2021) (NMPA-No21-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No21-2021 – Google Translation) (March 8, 2021)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Use of Electronic Payment Receipts for Drugs and Medical Device Product Registration Fees (No. 37 of 2022) (NMPA-No37-2022 – Standard Chinese) (Effective August 22, 2022)
National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Amendments to Good Manufacturing Practices for Pharmaceutical Products (No. 28) (NMPA-No28-2016) – Standard Chinese) (July 13, 2016)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Appendix to Good Manufacturing Practice for Drugs (2010 Revision) (No. 43 of 2022) (NMPA-No43-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No43-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2022)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Biological Product Registration Classification and Application Dossier Requirements (No. 43 of 2020) (NMPA-No43-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No43-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020 (registration) and October 1, 2020 (application))
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Changes to the Working Procedures During the Review of Drug Registration Applications (Prcdrs-Changes – Standard Chinese) (English-Prcrs-Changes – Google Translation) (November 9, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Chemical Drug Registration Classification and Application Material Requirements (No. 44 of 2020) (NMPA-No44-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No44-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020 (registration) and October 1, 2020 (application))
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Common Pharmaceutical Issues and Related Technical Requirements for Pre-Clinical Meetings for Phase III Clinical Trials of Innovative Chemical Drugs (Trial Implementation) (NMPA-No23-2023 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No23-2023 – Google Translation) (March 22, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Cybersecurity Standard Practice Guidelines - Guidelines for Identifying Sensitive Personal Information (Id-SPI – Standard Chinese) (English-Id-SPI – Google Translation) (Effective September 14, 2024)
China’s Secretariat of the National Cybersecurity Standardization Technical Committee
(Guidance) Drug Instructions and Label Management Regulations (SFDA Order No. 24) (ProvLabel – Standard Chinese) (Effective June 1, 2006)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Ethical Guidelines for Human Genome Editing Research (GeneEdit-Ethics – Standard Chinese) (English-GeneEdit-Ethics – Google Translation) (July 8, 2024)
National Science and Technology Ethics Committee, Central Science and Technology Commission, Party Central Committee
(Guidance) Filling in the Annual Work Summary Report of Drug Clinical Trial Institutions (No. 1 of 2024) (NMPA-No1-2024 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No1-2024 – Google Translation) (January 25, 2024)
National Food and Drug Administration Food and Drug Inspection Center, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Frequently Asked Questions and Answers on Rapid Reporting of Safety Data During Drug Clinical Trials (Version 2.0) (No. 17 of 2023) (NMPA-No17-2023 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No17-2023 – Google Translation) (March 17, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Good Clinical Practice for Drug Clinical Trials (No. 57 of 2020) (NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Good Manufacturing Practice for Drugs (2010 Revision) (NMPA-GMP - Chinese) (Effective March 1, 2011)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Good Manufacturing Practices for Pharmaceutical Products (No. 13) (NMPA-No13-2015 – Standard Chinese) (Effective May 18, 2015)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guidelines for Classifying Adverse Events in Clinical Trials of Preventive Vaccines (No. 102 of 2019) (NMPA-No102-2019 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No102-2019 – Google Translation) (December 31, 2019)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guidelines for Comprehensive Analysis of the Effectiveness of Clinical Studies of Drugs (No. 59 of 2021) (NMPA-No59-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No59-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 23, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Drug Clinical Trial Data Management and Statistical Analysis Plan (No. 63 of 2021) (NMPA-No63-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No63-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 27, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for General Considerations of Drug Clinical Trials (No. 11 of 2017) (NMPA-No11-2017 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No11-2017 – Google Translation) (January 18, 2017)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guidelines for International Multicenter Drug Clinical Trials (No. 2 of 2015) (NMPA-No2-2015 – Standard Chinese) (March 1, 2015)
National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Pharmacovigilance Inspections (No. 22 of 2022) (NMPA-No22-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No22-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective April 15, 2022)
National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Submission of Drug Clinical Trial Data (No. 16 of 2020) (NMPA-No16-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No16-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective October 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Application of Patient-Reported Outcomes in Drug Clinical Research and Development (No. 62 of 2021) (NMPA-No62-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No62-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 27, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Establishment of Ethical Review Committees for Clinical Research Involving Humans (2023 Edition) (EC-Guide – Standard Chinese) (June 6, 2023)
Office of Medical Ethics Expert Committee of the National Health Commission and the Chinese Hospital Association
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Preservation of Essential Documents for Drug Clinical Trials (No. 37 of 2020) (NMPA-No37-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No37-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Summary, Analysis, and Reporting of Safety Information During Drug Clinical Trials (NMPA-No16-2023 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No16-2023 - Google Translation) (March 17, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Guiding Principles for Multiple Issues in Drug Clinical Trials (No. 66 of 2020) (NMPA-No66-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No66-2021 – Google Translation) (December 31, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guiding Principles for the Adaptive Design of Drug Clinical Trials (No. 6 of 2021) (NMPA-No6-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No6-2021 – Google Translation) (January 29, 2021)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guiding Principles for Writing Clinical Risk Management Plans (No. 68 of 2021) (NMPA-No68-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No68-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 27, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Human Genetic Resources Service System: Application Guide (HGR-AppGuide – Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Health Commission
(Guidance) Interpretation of the Document "Measures for the Ethical Review of Life Science and Medical Research Involving Humans" (Measures-Ethics-Interp – Standard Chinese) (English-Measures-Ethics-Interp – Google Translation) (February 28, 2023)
National Health Commission
(Guidance) Interpretation of the Technical Guidelines for Accepting Data from Overseas Clinical Trials of Drugs (NMPA-No52-2018-Interp - Standard Chinese) (July 10, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Measures for the Supervision and Administration of Drug Production (No. 28 of 2020) (NMPA-No28-2020 – Standard Chinese) (Effective July 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Notice on the Requirements for Electronic Submission of Drug Registration Applications (ElectronicApps-Rqts – Standard Chinese) (December 2, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Pharmaceutical Research Information Guide for Phase III Clinical Trials of Innovative Chemical Drugs (No. 48 of 2018) (NMPA-No48-2018 - Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No48-2018 – Google Translation) (March 9, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Policy Interpretation of the Detailed Implementation Rules on the Management of Human Genetic Resources (Rules-MgmtHGR-Interp – Standard Chinese) (June 1, 2023)
Ministry of Science and Technology
(Guidance) Procedures for Safety Information Assessment and Risk Management during Drug Clinical Trials (Risk-Prcdr – Standard Chinese) (English-Risk-Prcdr – Google Translation) (November 3, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Requirements for Drug Records and Data Management for Trial Implementation (No. 74 of 2020) (NMPA-No74-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No74-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective December 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Standards and Procedures for the Rapid Reporting of Safety Data during Clinical Trials (G-SftyRptStds – Standard Chinese) (Effective May 1, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Statistical Guiding Principles for Centralized Monitoring of Drug Clinical Trials (No. 11 of 2022) (NMPA-No11-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No11-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective January 18, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Applying Decentralized Clinical Trials in Clinical Development of Rare Disease Drugs (DctrlzCTs-Rare – Standard Chinese) (English-DctrlzCTs-Rare – Google Translation) (May 30, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Changes in Marketed Chemical Drugs and Biological Products (Chngs-MktChemBio – Standard Chinese) (English-Chngs-MktChemBio – Google Translation) (February 10, 2021)
National Medical Productions Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Research and Development of Drugs for Rare Diseases (No. 71 of 2021) (NMPA-No71-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No71-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 31, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Trials of Chemical Compound Drugs (No. 15 of 2023) (NMPA-No15-2023 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No15-2023 – Google Translation) (March 17, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Trials of Gene Therapy Products for Rare Diseases (GeneCTs-Rare – Standard Chinese) (English-GeneCTs-Rare – Google Translation) (January 18, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Trials of Improved New Chemical Drugs (No. 54 of 2020) (NMPA-No54-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No54-2020 – Google Translation) (December 31, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Trials of Topically Administered and Locally Effective Drugs (No. 32 of 2022) (NMPA-No32-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No32-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective May 26, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Conditional Approval of Drugs for Marketing (CondtlAppl-Drugs – Standard Chinese) (English-CondtlAppl-Drugs – Google Translation) (November 19, 2020)
National Medical Productions Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Long-term Follow-up Clinical Research of Gene Therapy Products (No. 50 of 2021) (NMPA-No50-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No50-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 1, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Patient-Centered Drug Clinical Trial Design (PatientCtr-Design – Standard Chinese) (English-PatientCtr-Design – Google Translation) (July 27, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Change Research of Marketed Biological Products (Chngs-MktBio – Standard Chinese) (English-Chngs-MktBio – Google Translation) (June 25, 2021)
National Medical Productions Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Change Research of Marketed Chemical Drugs (Chngs-MktChem – Standard Chinese) (English-Chngs-MktChem – Google Translation) (February 10, 2021)
National Medical Productions Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Changes During Clinical Trials of Innovative Chemical Drugs (No. 22 of 2021) (NMPA-No22-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No22-2021 – Google Translation) (March 12, 2021)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Research and Changes of Biological Products during Clinical Trials (No. 29 of 2024) (NMPA-No29-2024 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No29-2024 – Google Translation) (June 7, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Research and Evaluation of Immune Cell Therapy Products (No. 30 of 2022) (NMPA-No30-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No30-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective May 26, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Research and Evaluation of In Vitro Genetic Modification Systems (No. 29 of 2022) (NMPA-No29-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No29-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective May 26, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Research and Evaluation of In Vivo Gene Therapy Products (No. 31 of 2022) (NMPA-No31-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No31-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective May 26, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Research and Evaluation of Specific Human Immunoglobulins (No. 27 of 2022) (NMPA-No27-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No27-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective May 20, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Protocol Changes During Drug Clinical Trials (No. 34 of 2022) (NMPA-No34-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No34-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective June 23, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for the Application of Phase I Clinical Trials of New Drugs (No. 16 of 2018) (NMPA-No16-2018 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No16-2018 – Google Translation) (January 11, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for the Evaluation of the Relevance of Adverse Events in Drug Clinical Trials (No. 31 of 2024) (NMPA-No31-2024 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No31-2024 – Google Translation) (June 7, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for the Implementation of Patient-Centered Drug Benefits - Risk Assessment (PatientCtr-Risk – Standard Chinese) (English-PatientCtr-Risk – Google Translation) (July 27, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for the Implementation of Patient-Centered Drug Clinical Trials (PatientCtr-Imp – Standard Chinese) (English-PatientCtr-Imp – Google Translation) (July 27, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for the Study of Human Bioavailability and Bioequivalence of Innovative Drugs (No. 4 of 2022) (NMPA-No4-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No4-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective January 4, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Writing Safety Reference Information in the Investigator's Manuals (No. 60 of 2021) (NMPA-No60-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No60-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 23, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guiding Principles for Accepting Data from Overseas Clinical Trials of Drugs (No. 52 of 2018) (NMPA-No52-2018 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No52-2018 – Google Translation) (July 6, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Working Procedures for Priority Review and Approval of Licensing (for Trial Implementation) (No. 82 of 2020) (NMPA-No82-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No82-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 8, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Decree) Decision of the State Council on Amending and Abolishing Some Administrative Regulations (No. 777) (SC-Order777 – Standard Chinese) (Effective May 1, 2024)
State Council
(Decree) Regulations on Network Data Security Management (No. 790) (DataSec-Regs – Standard Chinese) (Effective January 1, 2025)
State Council
(Notice) Adjustment of Matters Related to the Management of Human Genetic Resources (HGR-WorkUpdt – Standard Chinese) (June 21, 2023)
Ministry of Science and Technology
(Notice) Adjustments to the Human Genetic Resources Management Information System (HGR-InfoSys – Standard Chinese) (September 26, 2023)
Ministry of Science and Technology
(Notice) Announcement from the National Health Commission Regarding “Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the Administration of Human Genetic Resources (NHC-HGRmgt – Standard Chinese) (April 25, 2024)
National Health Commission
(Notice) Application of the Secondary Guiding Principles of the International Council for Harmonsation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (No. 10 of 2018) (NMPA-No10-2018 – Standard Chinese) (January 25, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration 
(Notice) Approval of the Pilot Program of Optimizing the Review and Approval of Clinical Trials of Innovative Drugs in Beijing and Shanghai (No. 55 of 2024) (NMPA-No55-2024 – Standard Chinese) (August 2, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration
(Notice) FAQs on Human Genetic Resources Management (HGR-FAQs – Standard Chinese) (September 12, 2023)
Ministry of Science and Technology
(Notice) Matters Related to the Relocation of the Center for Drug Evaluation Office (CDE-Reloctn – Standard Chinese) (July 31, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Notice) Pilot Work Plan for Optimizing the Review and Approval of Clinical Trials of Innovative Drugs (No. 21 of 2024) (NMPA-No21-2024 – Standard Chinese) (July 31, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration
(Notice) Publication of the Work Plan for the Reform of the Classification and Registration of Chemical Drugs (No. 51 of 2016) (NMPA-No51-2016 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No51-2016 – Google Translation) (March 4, 2016)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Notice) Review and Approval Procedures for New Overseas Drugs for Clinical Urgent Needs (No. 79 of 2018) (NMPA-No79-2018 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No79-2018 – Google Translation) (October 23, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation, and the National Health Commission
(Notice) Use of the New Version of the Drug Production License and Other Licenses (NMPA-No72-2019 – Standard Chinese) (July 25, 2019)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
Additional Resources
(Guidance) Handling Guideline: Bioequivalence and Clinical Trial Filing of Chemical Generic Drugs (CHN-70 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Handling Guideline: Drug Clinical Trial Approval (CHN-14 – Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Handling Guideline: Drug Clinical Trial Institution Registration (CHN-12 – Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Handling Guideline: Drug Clinical Trial Registration (CHN-13 – Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Handling Guideline: Priority Review and Approval of Drug Registration Applications (CHN-69 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Article) China Promulgates Revised Drug Registration Regulation (CHN-8) (April 29, 2020)
Covington
(Article) China: CFDA New Drug Import License Procedure (CHN-28) (January 15, 2020)
Roman, Reynaldo; Marken
(Article) China’s National Medical Products Administration Finalizes Two Implementing Rules of the Drug Administration Law (CHN-18) (April 2, 2020)
Li, Lei and Yang, Chen; Sidley Austin LLP
(Article) In Review: The Life Sciences Regulatory Regime in China (CHN-20) (March 24, 2021)
Gu, Aaron and Balzano, John C.; Covington & Burling LLP
(Article) Interpretation of the "Measures for Ethical Review of Biomedical Research Involving Humans" (CHN-41 - Standard Chinese) (November 7, 2016)
National Health Commission
(Article) Legal Protection of the Rights of Clinical Trial Subjects in China (CHN-26) (March 26, 2018)
Ren, Y., Jin, X., Jiang, S., Jiang, B.; The Journal of Biomedical Research
(Article) Life Sciences: Product Regulation and Liability in China (CHN-11) (January 7, 2019)
Wang, Katherine and Wu, Tina; Ropes & Gray
(Article) National Medical Products Newsletter, 2020. Volume 5 (CHN-1) (May 2020)
China Center for Food and Drug International Exchange (CCFDIE)
(Article) The Regulatory Requirements and Key Points of Drug Clinical Trials Registration in China (CHN-7) (May 20, 2020)
Yao, Zhuxing and Wang, Haixue; Applied Clinical Trials
(Article) Xi Jinping Hosted the Ninth Meeting of the Central Committee for Comprehensive Deepening Reform (CHN-3 - Standard Chinese) (July 24, 2019)
Xinhua News Agency
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (CHN-30) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (CHN-84) (October 19, 2013)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) ICH Guideline E2B (R3) on Electronic Transmission of Individual Case Safety Reports (ICSRs) - Data Elements and Message Specification - Implementation Guide (CHN-40) (Step 5 Version) (Implemented July 1, 2022)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Guideline: The Common Technical Document for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (M4) (CHN-38) (Step 5 Versions) (Modules range from 2002-2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (CHN-39) (Step 5 Version) (Implemented May 1, 2018)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) (Step 5 Version) (Implemented July 1, 2020)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) Applicant's Window (CHN-58 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Webpage) China Human Genetic Resources Management Office (CHN-4 – Standard Chinese) (October 10, 2022)
China National Center for Biotechnology Development, Ministry of Science and Technology
(Webpage) China International Trade Single Window (CHN-2 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
General Administration of Customs of the People's Republic of China
(Webpage) Contact Us (CHN-31 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) Country Profile: China (CHN-55) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) Drug and Medical Device Clinical Trial Institution Registration Management Information System (CHN-82 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) Drug Clinical Trial Registration and Information Disclosure Platform (CHN-53 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Webpage) Entry-Exit Health Quarantine Approval for Special Items (CHN-54 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
General Administration of Customs of the People's Republic of China
(Webpage) Human Genetic Resources Service System Login (CHN-6 – Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
Ministry of Science and Technology
(Webpage) ICH Guidelines (CHN-49 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Webpage) Internal Organization (CHN-77 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) Main Duties of National Medical Products Administration (CHN-78 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) Members and Observers (CHN-59) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) National Medical Products Administration – Drug Regulatory Documents (CHN-60 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) National Medical Products Administration Government Service Portal Login (CHN-71 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) National Medical Products Administration (CHN-81 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) What is AQSIQ? (CHN-46) (Last Updated January 28, 2022)
General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection & Quarantine
(Webpage) What We Do (CHN-24) (Last Updated September 22, 2018)
National Health Commission
Forms
(Form) Ethics Review Application for Research Involving Humans (CHN-27) (English-CHN-27 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Shanghai Ethics Committee for Clinical Research
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

China
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
This message was updated on January 13, 2026
Information Not Yet Incorporated Into Country Profile:

Planned Implementation of ICH E6(R3) Guideline

On December 22, 2025, the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) announced the application of the ICH Harmonised Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R3) to all drug clinical trials conducted after March 31, 2026. For more details, see the NMPA announcement.

Personal Information Protection Audit Requirements

The Cyberspace Administration of China published the Measures for the Administration of Compliance Audits on Personal Information Protection, which went into effect on May 1, 2025. The measures outline the requirements and processes for both self-initiated and regulator-requested compliance audit activities. Additionally, guidelines for conducting compliance audits are provided, which detail the personal information processing activities that must be audited.

Human Genetic Resources Management

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Clinical research in China is regulated and overseen by the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) (the Chinese name translates as “State Drug Administration”) and the National Health Commission (NHC).

National Medical Products Administration

As per the DRR, the NMPA-Org, the DAL, the RegImplemDAL, the RegImplemDAL-Amndt, the SC-Opinions-No44, the NMPA-No50-2018, and the NMPA-No230-2015, the NMPA is the regulatory authority responsible for national drug registration management, which includes regulation of clinical trials. Per the DRR, NMPA’s Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) is responsible for the evaluation of drug clinical trial applications, drug marketing authorization applications, supplementary applications, and overseas drug production registration applications. The NMPA grants permission for clinical trials to be conducted in China in accordance with the provisions of the DAL, the VaccineLaw, the DRR, the SC-Opinions-No44, the NMPA-No50-2018, and the NMPA-No230-2015. The drug category in which an applicant chooses to register determines the clinical trial application review and approval or filing process.

Per the SC-IRP and the SAMR-Org, China established the State Administration for Market Regulation (SAMR). The SAMR is a full ministry agency reporting directly to the State Council of the People's Republic of China. Under the SAMR is the NMPA, which regulates clinical trials.

As delineated in the NMPA-Org and CHN-78, the NMPA implements China’s guidelines, policies, and decision-making for the supervision and administration of drugs, medical devices, and cosmetics. It is responsible for safety supervision; standards management; drug registration; quality management; risk management; pharmacist licensing; inspection systems; international cooperation; guiding provincial and municipal drug administration; and other tasks assigned by the State Council and Party Central Committee. The NMPA is charged with accelerating the examination and approval of innovative drugs, establishing a system of listing license holders, promoting electronic review and approval, and improving efficiencies.

Per CHN-77, the following NMPA departments are involved with clinical trial application and drug registration:

Drug Registration Management Department – formulates, supervises, and implements drug standards (including clinical trial quality management), technical guidelines, and registration
Drug Administration Department – formulates and supervises the implementation of pharmaceutical production quality management standards for drugs, Chinese medicines, biological products, and special drugs (e.g., radioactive and toxic), and formulates and implements a drug adverse reaction monitoring and alert system
Per the DRR, the NMPA-No50-2018, and CHN-81, the NMPA includes the National Institutes for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC) and the CDE, which are directly involved in the clinical trial application and drug registration approval process. Other relevant institutes and organizations include the National Pharmacopoeia Commission, the Food and Drug Inspection Center, the Medical Device Technology Evaluation Center, the Administration Service Center, the Information Center, the Licensed Pharmacist Certification Center, the News and Publicity Center, and the International Exchange Center.

Further, the DRR delineates the responsibilities of the drug regulatory departments of provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities directly under the Central Government. With respect to clinical trials, they are responsible for organizing the daily supervision and investigation of institutions conducting drug clinical trials; participating in drug registration verification and inspection organized by the NMPA; and other matters entrusted by the NMPA.

The roles of the CDE and the NIFDC in the clinical trial application review and approval process are discussed further in the Scope of Assessment section.

National Health Commission

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the State Council’s NHC is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024). The NHC-HGRmgt states that the original application process and online platform (CHN-6) remain unchanged. As indicated in CHN-24, the NHC is responsible for formulating health policies and systems in China, including health services, hospitals, special populations, drugs, traditional Chinese medicines, and disease control and prevention. See CHN-24 for a comprehensive list of NHC responsibilities and functions. (Please note that the MgmtHumanGen was amended by SC-Order777 to reflect the transfer of HGR management from MOST to the NHC, but the Rules-MgmtHGR has not been amended yet to show the transfer.)

The MgmtHumanGen and the Rules-MgmtHGR stipulate that MOST’s (now the NHC’s) HGR responsibilities include employing experts in the fields of biotechnology, medicine, health, ethics, law, etc. to form an expert review committee to review and approve international cooperative research. The Rules-MgmtHGR indicates that MOST (now the NHC) should support the rational use of HGR to carry out scientific research, develop the biomedical industry, improve diagnosis and treatment techniques, strengthen management and oversight of HGR, improve approval services and efficiency, and advance the standardization of approvals and information disclosure. MOST (now the NHC) is responsible for national efforts such as the investigation, administrative licensing, supervision and inspection, and administrative punishments of HGR. Regarding administrative licensing, licenses must be obtained for the collection and preservation of Chinese HGR and for international collaborations in certain situations. As needed, MOST (now the NHC) entrusts relevant organizations to carry out formal reviews and technical reviews of application materials for administrative licensing of HGR, as well as efforts such as filing, prior reporting, supervision and inspection, and administrative punishments. The science and technology departments (committees and bureaus) of provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities directly under the Central Government, and the Science and Technology Bureau of the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps, are responsible for the management of the following HGR in their regions:

Oversight and inspection and routine management of HGR
Investigation and handling of illegal cases of HGR within the scope of their authority
As entrusted by MOST (now the NHC), carry out other efforts such as administrative licensing of HGR in their region
See Rules-MgmtHGR-Interp for a policy interpretation of the Rules-MgmtHGR.

Per HGR-WorkUpdt, the NHC’s China Biotechnology Development Center was entrusted to implement technical work related to the management of HGR. As described in CHN-4, the functions of the Center are:

Coordinate and supervise the implementation of the management of HGR
Examine and approve international cooperation projects involving HGR
Accept applications for the export of HGR, and handle exports and export certificates
Register and manage important genetic lineages and genetic resources in specific regions
Manage other work related to HGR
The Rules-MgmtHGR also state that applications must pass a security review organized by MOST (now the NHC) if the study’s provision or opening of HGR information to foreign entities may impact China’s public health, national security, or the social public interest. In addition, per the Bioscrty-Law, MOST (now the NHC) regulates biotechnology safety under the National Security Commission pursuant to a Coordination Mechanism for National Biosecurity (CMNB). The CMNB consists of the competent State Council departments for health, agriculture and rural affairs, science and technology, and foreign affairs, as well as relevant military agencies, to analyze national biosecurity issues, and organize, coordinate, and drive national biosecurity work. MOST (now the NHC) and the other agencies under CMNB establish safety monitoring/reporting requirements, an early warning system, and implementing regulations.

Regarding monitoring and protecting HGR, as delineated in MgmtHumanGen, NHC (formerly the MOST) is also authorized to strengthen the protection of HGR in China, which involves conducting surveys and implementing a declaration and registration system for important genetic families and human genetic resources in specific regions. MOST (now the NHC) will enforce the regulations and levy fines for illegal HGR activities which include:

Collecting HGR from important genetic families and specific regions in China without approval, or collecting HGR of the types and quantities specified by MOST (now the NHC) through special regulation
Preserving Chinese HGR without approval
Conducting international cooperative scientific research using Chinese HGR without approval
Failing to pass the security review that may affect China's public health, national security, and social public interest to foreign organizations, individuals, and institutions that they establish or actually control, and
Failing to file with MOST (now the NHC) the type, quantity, and use of the HGR in China before an international cooperative clinical trial begins
Other Considerations

Per CHN-59, China is a regulatory member of the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). CHN-49 summarizes the ICH guiding principles and provides Chinese translations, when available.

Please note: China is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (CHN-30), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see CHN-55.

Contact Information

National Medical Products Administration (NMPA)

Per CHN-31, the following is the NMPA’s contact information:

National Medical Products Administration
No. 1 Beiluyuan Zhanlan Road
Xicheng District
Beijing 100037
P.R. China

Per CDE-Reloctn, the following is CDE’s contact information:

National Medical Products Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation
Building 1-5
District 2, No. 22 Guangde Street
Beijing Economic and Technological Development Zone
Beijing, 100076
P.R. China

Phone number: 010-68585566

National Health Commission

Per HGR-WorkUpdt, HGR-AppGuide, and CHN-4, following is the contact information for NHC’s HGR consultation:

National Health Commission
China Biotechnology Development Center
Rooms 1022 and 1001, Building 4
No. 16 West Fourth Ring Middle Road
Haidian District
Beijing, 100036
P.R. China

Contact: Zhu Min
Phone number: 010-88225151 or 010-88225168
Information system support: 17610386080
Email: ycb@cncbd.org.cn

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Overview

National Medical Products Administration

In accordance with the DRR, the DAL, the NMPA-No50-2018, the SC-Opinions-No44, and the NMPA-No230-2015, the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) is responsible for reviewing and approving clinical trial applications for drugs to be registered in China, as required. The DRR clarifies that the NMPA regulates clinical trials for drugs in development that are ultimately seeking market approvals in China. Per the DAL and the DRR, and as explained in CHN-7, CHN-18, and CHN-1, China adopted a drug marketing authorization holders (MAHs) system across China. All entities or drug research institutions holding drug marketing authorizations must take responsibility for drug safety, effectiveness, and quality controllability in the whole process of drug research and development, production, distribution, and use. Based on this system, the MAHs are also named as applicants or sponsors during clinical trials. The scope of the NMPA’s assessment includes Phase I through Phase IV clinical trials and bioequivalence studies. As stated in the DRR, clinical trials of drugs must be reviewed and approved by an ethics committee (EC). The DRR indicates that EC review may be submitted in parallel to NMPA’s review, but the study cannot be initiated until after review and approval by the EC. The DRR emphasizes a risk-based approach to drug registration and clinical trial approvals, following the principles of openness, fairness, and justice. This is guided by demonstrating clinical value, encouraging research and creation of new drugs, and promoting the development of generic drugs.

As delineated in the DRR, the SC-Opinions-No44, and the NMPA-No51-2016, the drug classification in which an applicant chooses to register determines the clinical trial application review and approval process. Per the DRR, the registration of drugs must be classified and managed in accordance with three (3) broad categories of Chinese medicines, chemical medicines, and biological products. The NMPA-No44-2020 and CHN-1 delineate the classifications within the chemical medicine category as follows:

Class 1: Innovative drugs that have not been marketed in China or overseas (i.e., drugs that contain new compounds with clear structures and pharmacological effects, and have clinical values)
Class 2: Modified new drugs that have not been marketed in China or overseas (i.e., drugs that have their structure, dosage form, formulation, process, route of administration, and indications optimized on the basis of known active ingredients and have significant clinical advantages)
Class 3: Drugs manufactured by domestic applicants by imitating the original drugs that have been marketed overseas but not yet in China; such drugs must have the quality and efficacy consistent with the reference listed drug
Class 4: Drugs manufactured by domestic applicants by imitating the original drugs that have been marketed in China; such drugs must have the quality and efficacy consistent with the reference formulations
Class 5: Drugs that have been marketed overseas and are under application for being marketed in China
As per NMPA-No21-2021, the NMPA provides additional technical support to expedite the review and approval process of domestically unlisted drugs that have been listed overseas in the above Classes 3 and 5.

Per the DRR, the registration of biological products is classified according to innovative biological products, new medicines of improved biological products, and already listed biological products (including biological similar drugs). As delineated in the NMPA-No43-2020, biological products refer to preparations that use microorganisms, cells, animal or human-derived tissues, and bodily fluids as starting materials, and are made with biological technology for the prevention, treatment, and diagnosis of human diseases. In order to standardize the registration and management of biological products, biological products are divided into preventive biological products, therapeutic biological products, and in vitro diagnostic reagents managed by biological products. Preventive biological products refer to vaccine-like biological products used for human immunization to prevent and control the occurrence and prevalence of diseases, including immunization program vaccines and non-immunization program vaccines. Therapeutic biological products refer to biological products used in the treatment of human diseases, such as proteins, polypeptides and their derivatives prepared from engineered cells (such as bacteria, yeast, insect, plant, and mammalian cells) with different expression systems; cell therapy and gene therapy products; allergen products; microecological products; biologically active products extracted from human or animal tissues or bodily fluids or prepared by fermentation, etc. The following are descriptions of biological product classifications for both preventive and therapeutic uses:

Class 1: Innovative vaccines that have not been marketed at home or abroad
Class 2: Improved vaccines that improve the safety, effectiveness, and quality controllability of new products by improving the domestic or overseas marketed vaccine products, and have obvious advantages
Class 3: Vaccines that have been marketed at home or abroad
Per the VaccineLaw, the NMPA must approve vaccine clinical trials. The NMPA-No32-2019 explains that the VaccineLaw strengthens the supervision and enforcement of vaccines and deepens the reform of the drug review and approval system. This includes strengthening the management of vaccine clinical trial institutions and investigating and punishing illegal activities related to applying for vaccine clinical trials (e.g., false data).

National Health Commission

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024. SC-Order777 amends the MgmtHumanGen to reflect the transfer of HGR management from MOST to NHC, but the Bioscrty-Law and the Rules-MgmtHGR have not been amended yet to show the transfer). Per the Bioscrty-Law and the MgmtHumanGen, MOST’s (now the NHC’s) scope of assessment is the collection, preservation, utilization, and external provision of HGR to ensure these activities:

Do not endanger the public health, national security, and social public interests of China
Are in accordance with ethics principles and reviews per relevant regulations
Respect the privacy rights of HGR donors, obtain their prior informed consent, and protect their legitimate rights and interests, and
Comply with the technical norms formulated by MOST (now the NHC)
See the Rules-MgmtHGR for the prescribed conditions when MOST (now the NHC) licenses must be obtained for the collection of Chinese HGR.

As delineated in the Rules-MgmtHGR, MOST (NHC) licenses must be obtained for the preservation of HGR, which involves storing HGR with legal sources under appropriate environmental conditions, ensuring their quality and safety, and using them for future scientific research, excluding temporary storage for teaching purposes. If the preservation also involves the collection of HGR, applicants only need to apply for an administrative license for the preservation of HGR, and do not need to separately apply for a collection license. Next, the Rules-MgmtHGR require administrative licenses for international scientific research cooperation that use and export HGR. If there is no export, only prior filing/notification with MOST (now the NHC) is required before initiating the international research cooperation.

Per the Rules-MgmtHGR, where multicenter clinical research is carried out, the sponsor or the primary site/unit (either the Chinese unit or a foreign party unit) may apply for administrative licensing or filing after the primary site/unit passes the ethics review. After the sponsor or primary site/unit obtains the administrative license or completes the filing, the medical and health institution(s) participating in the clinical research must submit the ethics review approval document of their site/unit, or the certification materials for the ethics review approval provided by the primary site/unit, along with the letter of commitment issued by the site/unit, to MOST (now the NHC). Following those submissions, the international cooperative clinical research can be carried out.

As delineated in the HGR-AppGuide, the scope of the administrative license for the collection of HGR applies to the following activities to be carried out within the territory of China:

HGR collection activities for important genetic pedigrees – applies to blood-related groups with genetic diseases and/or with special hereditary physical or physiological characteristics, as well as the members of the group with genetic diseases and/or special hereditary physical or physiological characteristics involving three (3) generations or more.
HGR collection activities in specific areas – applies to HGR from populations who have lived in isolation or special environments for a long time and have special physical characteristics or adaptive traits in physiological characteristics. Specific areas are not divided based on whether they are ethnic minority concentrated areas.
HGR collection activities for large-scale population research with a population of more than 3,000 – includes but is not limited to cohort studies, cross-sectional studies, clinical studies, and constitutional studies.
Clinical Trial Review Process

National Medical Products Administration

As delineated in the DRR, the NMPA is the regulatory authority responsible for national drug registration management, which includes management of clinical trial applications. The NMPA’s Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) is responsible for evaluating drug clinical trial applications, drug marketing authorization applications, supplementary applications, and re-registration applications for drugs produced overseas. The DRR states that applicants may communicate with major technical institutions including the CDE at key stages, such as before submitting a drug clinical trial application.

Communications and Pre-Application Protocol Review

Per the NMPA-No50-2018, the NMPA-No48-2020, and the NMPA-No51-2023, with regard to chemical drugs and biological products, the applicant must first request a communication meeting with the CDE to determine the integrity of the clinical trial application data and the feasibility of conducting the clinical trial. The NMPA-No51-2023 reaffirms the required communications between the applicant and the CDE and review of the clinical trial protocol before submitting the clinical trial application. The CDE conducts a preliminary review of the information provided by the applicant according to relevant requirements. The review team reviews the science, completeness, operability, and risk controllability of the clinical trial protocol, focusing on the basis for the research, safety, and whether the risk management measures of the drug support the conduct of clinical trials. In addition to clearly responding to the specific questions raised by the applicant, the submitted clinical trial protocol is reviewed to ensure participant protection. For confirmatory, or critical clinical trials, CDE must also evaluate the suitability of the target population, the science of the dosage and cycle and the primary endpoint indicators, the acceptability of statistical assumptions, the rationality of sample size estimation, the operability of the risk management plan, and the benefit/risk assessment elements. CDE’s review team communicates its findings by holding a meeting (face-to-face or online) or by giving a written reply and must provide the applicant with the minutes of the communication meeting or the written reply. See NMPA-No51-2023 for additional details on the pre-application communications and protocol review.

Clinical Trial Application Review

Per the NMPA-No50-2018, the NMPA’s Drug Registration Management Department is responsible for conducting administrative reviews of clinical trial applications, and then forwarding the submissions to the CDE for technical review. (Deviations from this general process are described further below in this section.) The DRR states that after completing the pharmacology, toxicology, and other studies supporting the clinical trials of the drug, the applicant must submit relevant research materials in accordance with the application requirements (See Submission Process and Submission Content sections for details). If the application materials meet the screening requirements, NMPA’s pharmaceutical, medical, and other technical personnel review the clinical trial applications for drugs.

Per the DRR, when reviewing the application, the CDE will conduct an associated review of the chemical raw materials, auxiliary materials, and packaging materials and containers used in direct contact with the pharmaceutical preparations. The CDE makes a risk-based decision on whether to initiate an on-site inspection based on the registered varieties, processes, facilities, and previous acceptance verification. For innovative drugs, improved new drugs, and biological products, on-site verification of drug registration manufacturing and inspection of pre-market drug manufacturing quality management must be conducted. If manufacturing verification is required, the applicant and the drug regulatory department of the province, autonomous region, or municipality directly under the Central Government where the applicant or manufacturer is located will be informed. The National Institutes for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC) (also referred to as the Procuratorate), or the drug inspection agency designated by the NMPA, will conduct the inspections and testing, as needed. The drug registration inspection of overseas-produced drugs must be implemented by the port drug inspection agency.

The NMPA-No51-2023 specifies that the CDE review team must evaluate the science, completeness, operability, and risk controllability of the clinical trial protocol in the application. If necessary, an expert consultation meeting may be held. For clinical trials that are approved after review, the technical review team’s conclusion and associated "Clinical Trial Approval Notice" must clearly state the indications, clinical trial protocol title, number, version number, version date, etc. The review team’s conclusion and notice may propose revisions or suggestions to the clinical trial protocol if necessary. For clinical trial protocols that require revisions, CDE will notify the applicant through a professional inquiry letter, clearly informing the applicant of the problems and revision opinions in the current protocol. The applicant must submit a revised clinical trial protocol within five (5) days, following the guidance in the Prcdrs-Changes. For clinical trial protocols that are deemed unfeasible, have participant safety risks, or other serious defects, and the applicant cannot revise and improve them within the time limit specified in the inquiry letter, the clinical trial application will not be approved. In the review team’s conclusion and the "Notice of Disapproval of Drug Clinical Trials", the applicant should be clearly informed of the reasons for the disapproval.

The NMPA-No51-2023 also states that before conducting subsequent phased drug exploratory clinical trials, a corresponding drug clinical trial protocol must be reviewed and approved by the EC. After completing exploratory clinical trials and before conducting confirmatory (or critical) clinical trials, an application for a communication meeting must be submitted to the CDE to evaluate the subsequent clinical trial protocol (if applicable).

With regard to vaccine clinical trials, the VaccineLaw indicates that the NMPA will review the clinical trial plan, the safety monitoring and evaluation system, the selection of participants, and whether there are effective measures according to the degree of risk to protect the legal rights of the participants. Vaccine clinical trials can only be carried out or organized by a tertiary medical institution that meets the conditions prescribed by the NMPA and the health and safety department of the State Council, or a disease prevention and control institution at or above the provincial level.

Per the DRR, the DAL, the NMPA-No50-2018, and CHN-14, a clinical trial application will be considered approved after 60 working days if the applicant does not receive a rejection or an inquiry for clarification from the NMPA. As specified in the DRR, drug clinical trials must be carried out within three (3) years after approval. If the drug clinical trial application is approved and no participant signs an informed consent form within three (3) years from the date of approval, the approval lapses. If it is still necessary to carry out the drug clinical trial, the applicant must re-apply. Upon approval/registration of the drug, the applicant receives a drug registration certificate, which is valid for five (5) years. An application for drug re-registration must be submitted six (6) months before the validity period expires.

The DRR states that to amend content in the original drug registration approval, the applicant must conduct sufficient research and verification on the change of the drug and fully evaluate the possible impact of the change on the drug. Data on the impact of safety, efficacy, and quality control must be submitted with the application for amendment. The NMPA-No51-2023 indicates that when changes to a clinical trial protocol are needed, the sponsor may first conduct a self-assessment of the changes in accordance with the relevant requirements of the DRR and the NMPA-No34-2022, and implement further work based on the results of the self-assessment. For substantial changes, the sponsor must submit materials in accordance with the relevant requirements of the NMPA-No34-2022. The CDE review team must review the supplementary application and notify the applicant of whether any/all of the proposed changes are approved. For changes that are not approved, CDE must clearly state the reasons. See NMPA-No51-2023 for definitions of substantial and non-substantial changes to a protocol. Also see Prcdrs-Changes for working procedures for other changes during the review of the clinical trial application.

Expedited Clinical Trial Review

The DRR authorizes regulatory pathways for priority review and approval (including for breakthrough therapeutic drugs), conditional approval, and special approval procedures. As per the SC-Opinions-No44, the NMPA-No230-2015, and the NMPA-No51-2016, a new drug classification system, priority review for innovative drugs and those deemed to have an urgent clinical need, and other changes help China to be more innovative and expedite reviews. With regard to priority review, per the NMPA-No230-2015 and the DRR, the NMPA may apply expedited review and approval procedures to applications for urgently needed drugs and vaccines that are intended to treat certain illnesses or patient populations (e.g., children or elderly people) that the State Council or the NMPA consider to be clinically in demand. The DRR expanded priority review to breakthrough therapeutic drugs, which are used to prevent and treat diseases with the following conditions: are seriously life threatening or seriously affect the quality of life, there are no effective prevention or treatment methods, and there is sufficient evidence to show that they have obvious clinical advantages. Applicants must apply to the CDE at the critical stage of the drug clinical trial. See CHN-69 for handling guidelines on priority review and approval.

The NMPA-No21-2024 describes NMPA’s pilot work plan for optimizing the review and approval of clinical trials for innovative drugs. This initiative aims to review and approve innovative drug clinical trial applications within 30 business days (a reduction from the 60 days as described above in the normal procedures). Pilot projects will be carried out in provinces (autonomous regions and municipalities) that meet the conditions laid out in NMPA-No21-2024. The scope of the pilot project is clinical trial applications for Class 1 innovative drugs (excluding cell and gene therapy products, vaccine products, etc.). Applicants are not subject to regional restrictions and must have at least three (3) innovative drug clinical trial applications approved at home and abroad, have extensive experience in clinical trial implementation and pharmacovigilance management, and be able to conduct a comprehensive risk assessment of clinical trial projects and develop an effective risk management plan before submitting a clinical trial application. In principle, the pilot institution must be a national medical center or national clinical medical research center in the pilot area and must have established a work system to provide clinical trial project establishment, ethics review, and contract review services before the applicant submits a new drug clinical trial application. See NMPA-No21-2024 for additional requirements on application submission and applicant and institutional eligibility. The applicant must initiate the clinical trial within 12 weeks after the approval of the clinical trial application. The pilot work will last for one (1) year and the experience of the pilot work will be summarized in July 2025. One (1) pilot project has been approved in Beijing and Shanghai as indicated in NMPA-No55-2024.

According to the NMPA-No82-2020, the NMPA establishes working procedures for the review of breakthrough therapy drugs, conditional approval of drug marketing priority review, and approval of drug marketing authorization. Sponsors can apply for expedited status for breakthrough therapeutic drugs in Phase I and II clinical trials—usually no later than before the commencement of Phase III clinical trials. Breakthrough drug procedures are designed to be used during clinical trials of drugs to prevent and treat patients with conditions that may be severely life-threatening or that may severely affect their quality of life. There are also no existing effective prevention and treatment methods nor is there sufficient evidence to show that the investigational drugs being tested have obvious clinical advantages compared with existing treatment methods. Also see CondtlAppl-Drugs for technical guidelines on the conditional approval of drugs for marketing.

Per the NMPA-No79-2018, the NMPA established a special review channel for urgently needed drugs that were already on the market in the United States, Europe, and Japan since 2008. Applicants may apply for a drug listing and proceed to conduct the clinical trials while the CDE conducts a technical review of the application materials.

The DRR also authorizes the CDE to conditionally approve breakthrough therapeutic drugs for marketing during clinical trials and vaccines that are urgently needed for major public health emergencies and the benefits outweigh the risks. The applicant must communicate to the CDE on the conditions for marketing with conditional approval and the research work to be completed after marketing, and submit an application for drug marketing approval after communication and confirmation. For the conditionally approved drugs and vaccines, risk management measures must be implemented after the drug is marketed, and the drug clinical trial must be completed within the prescribed time limit. Finally, the DRR authorizes the NMPA to implement special approval procedures for drugs required for public health emergencies. The circumstances, procedures, time limits, and requirements for special approval, will be subject to the NMPA’s procedures for specific approval of drugs.

For background on China’s reformation of the review and approval system to encourage innovation of drugs, see the SC-Opinions-No42. China’s regulatory pathways for expedited approvals and other reforms to the clinical trial submission and review process are described in the Submission Process and Submission Content sections. NMPA-No52-2018-Interp describes the requirements for clinical trial and drug registration applications using trial data generated entirely overseas, as well as data generated from simultaneous research occurring in China and abroad. CHN-11 also provides useful information on the NMPA’s overall clinical trial application review and approval process.

Overseas Data and Waiving Local Clinical Trials

The NMPA-No35-2017 and interpretations in NMPA-No52-2018-Interp describe requirements for clinical trial and drug registration applications to the NMPA using trial data generated entirely overseas, as well as data generated from simultaneous research occurring in China and abroad. With regard to the latter, researchers can conduct Phase I of multi-regional clinical trials (MRCT) of imported investigational new drugs and therapeutic biological products (excluding vaccines) simultaneously in China.

As per NMPA-No52-2018, clinical trial and drug registration applications for imported new drugs or therapeutic biological products using trial data generated entirely overseas do not need to be registered first in their own country in order to enter China. Overseas clinical trial data is acceptable for direct China registration provided that:

The data is reliable, authenticated, and complies with the requirements of the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37)
The data can assess the efficacy and safety for the target indication
There are no ethnic sensitivities to Chinese local populations influencing efficacy and safety
The data meets China’s drug registration requirements
See the NMPA-No52-2018 for additional details on the review and approval of overseas clinical trial data. For overseas clinical trial data completed before the enactment of NMPA-No35-2017, the NMPA will consider exemption from conducting local clinical trials, with the condition that the applications meet all other Chinese drug regulatory requirements.

For a running list (in reverse chronological order) of NMPA guidance on drug regulatory requirements, please refer to CHN-60.

National Health Commission

The MgmtHumanGen and the Bioscrty-Law prohibit foreign entities or individuals from collecting or preserving Chinese HGR in China, or providing Chinese HGR for use abroad, except under prescribed conditions to carry out scientific research activities, which must be conducted through collaboration with Chinese scientific research institutions, higher education institutions, medical institutions, or enterprises. Per the MgmtHumanGen and the Rules-MgmtHGR, the foreign entity and the Chinese entity must jointly file an application for approval to MOST (now the NHC), and the research must pass an ethics review in the countries (regions) where the partners are located. The only exception to the approval requirement is international collaborations in clinical trials that do not involve the export of Chinese HGR materials such as organs, tissues, or cells comprising the human genome, genes, or other genetic substances. Such clinical trial collaborations, however, must be filed with MOST (now the NHC) on its online platform (CHN-6), which will generate a record number. See HGR-InfoSys for background on CHN-6. Per HGR-InfoSys, for help with the online platform, contact Zhu Min with the NHC’s China Biotechnology Development Center at 010-88225151 or 010-88225168; or the information system support at 17610386080.

Per the HGR-AppGuide, following administrative screening, the NHC will confirm receipt through CHN-6 and organize a technical review. NHC must conduct its review and issue a decision within 20 working days. If the application is approved, NHC notifies the applicant of the approval through CHN-6 and a letter. If there are missing materials, NHC gives the applicant a one-time opportunity to correct the application and resubmit. If the application exceeds the scope of the license, NHC informs the applicant that the application is not approved.

The Bioscrty-Law prohibits engaging in biotechnology research, development, and application activities that endanger public health, damage biological resources, or destroy ecosystems and biodiversity. Units engaged in biotechnology clinical trials must be responsible for the safety of their biotechnology research, development, and application; adopt biosafety risk prevention and control measures; and formulate biosafety training, follow-up inspections, regular reports, etc. China is implementing a classified management system for biotechnology research and development activities into three (3) categories: high-risk, medium-risk, and low-risk. The risk classification standards are to be formulated, adjusted, and announced by the competent State Council departments for science and technology (now the NHC), health, agriculture, and rural areas. High-risk and medium-risk biotechnology research and development activities must include risk assessments and risk prevention/control and emergency plans for biosafety incidents. The Rules-MgmtHGR also states that clinical trial applications must pass a security review organized by MOST (now the NHC) if the study’s provision or opening of HGR information to foreign entities may impact China’s public health, national security, or the social public interest.

For additional details, see the HGR-FAQs for frequently asked questions on HGR applications. Also see the Submission Process and Submission Content sections and the Specimens topic for additional information on HGR regulatory management.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
National Medical Products Administration

In accordance with the DRR, the applicant is required to pay a fee after the drug registration is approved by the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA). As per the NMPA-No75-2020 and CHN-14, the NMPA charges the following drug registration fees to review and approve clinical trials as part of the drug registration process (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

New drugs made in China: 192,000 Yuan
New drugs made outside China: 376,000 Yuan
Generic drugs made in China: 318,000 Yuan
Generic drugs made outside China: 502,000 Yuan
One-time import of drugs: 2,000 Yuan
As specified in NMPA-No75-2020 and CHN-14, the fees are based on one (1) active pharmaceutical ingredient or one (1) preparation as one (1) variety. If another specification is added, the registration fee will be increased by 20% according to the corresponding category.

For further guidance on fees associated with submitting supplementary applications and registering renewals for imported drugs and more, please refer to NMPA-No75-2020.

Payment Instructions

NMPA-No37-2022 indicates that to register a drug, the applicant should submit the drug registration application to NMPA’s Government Service Portal (CHN-71). The relevant center will conduct an administrative review. Next, the non-tax income collection management system of the Ministry of Finance will send an electronic payment code to the applicant in the form of a text message. The applicant can pay through the counter payment, self-service terminal, online payment, self-service POS card, bank exchange, or transfer and payment. The applicant will receive confirmation of electronic payment via email within 10 working days. Electronic payment documents have the same legal effect as paper instruments.

National Health Commission

Per HGR-AppGuide, the National Health Commission (NHC) does not charge a fee for an application for a human genetic resources (HGR) license in China.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Overview

As per the Measures-Ethics, the RegEthics, the EC-Guide, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the DRR, and the DAL, an ethics committee (EC) must approve a clinical trial application prior to a sponsor initiating a clinical trial. Per the NMPA-NHC-No101-2019, each institution that conducts biomedical research is required to have an EC that is responsible for reviewing the scientific and ethical rationality of drug clinical trial programs, reviewing and supervising the qualifications of drug clinical trial researchers, supervising the development of drug clinical trials, and ensuring the ethics review process is independent, objective, and fair. Per the Measures-Ethics, institutions conducting life sciences and medical research involving people must establish ECs to carry out ethics reviews of such research. When the institution does not establish an EC, or the EC is unable to meet the needs of the review, the institution may entrust another institutional EC or a regional EC and implement extended supervision through follow-up reviews.

As described in the EC-Guide, China’s ethics review landscape comprises ethics expert committees and institutional ECs. Ethics expert committees are divided into the National Medical Ethics Expert Committee and provincial medical ethics expert committees. They are mainly responsible for guidance, consultation, and training, and generally do not undertake specific ethics review tasks. Institutional ECs are established by medical and health institutions in accordance with relevant requirements, and are mainly responsible for ethics review, training, and consultation in their institutions. Per the Measures-Ethics, provincial-level health departments establish and manage regional ECs. The EC-Guide states that the regional ECs and institutional ECs have the same status and are subject to the same requirements. ECs at different levels and in different institutions should strictly perform their respective duties, carry out effective communication and collaboration, adhere to the independence, impartiality, and objectivity of ethics review, and ensure that all medical research complies with ethical standards and requirements to fully protect the safety and rights of research participants. Following are brief overviews of each type of EC:

The National Medical Ethics Expert Committee formulates standards for the construction of institutional ECs and ethics review guidelines, including review content, review procedures, additional protection for special groups, and review time limits; publishes ethics review requirements for high-risk activities in scientific and technological ethics; and formulates standard requirements for ethics review application materials.
The provincial medical ethics expert committees promote the implementation of the above-mentioned ethics review standards and operating guidelines within the administrative region, promotes the construction and operation of the institutional ECs in the region, and standardizes the work of ethics review. The provincial medical ethics expert committees can make supplementary adjustments to the above-mentioned ethics review standards and operating guidelines in light of the cultural customs of the region.
The institutional EC establishes and improves the ethics review work system and operating procedures in accordance with the guidance of the national and the provincial medical ethics expert committees, improves the conflict of interest management and quality control mechanisms, and ensures that the ethics review process is independent, objective, and fair. ECs at different levels and in different institutions should strictly perform their respective duties, which includes conducting and ensuring ethics reviews that protect the safety and rights of research participants.
Note that per the Measures-Ethics-Interp, the main framework and provisions of the Measures-Ethics and the RegEthics are generally consistent and both regulations should be followed. Some provisions in the newer Measures-Ethics have been refined and improved in combination with the requirements of new laws and regulations and the actual conditions of colleges, universities, and research institutes. The RegEthics will be reviewed and revised to closely align with the Measures-Ethics. (ClinRegs will monitor and update the China profile, as needed.)

Ethics Committee Composition

Pursuant to the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the EC composition must meet health authority requirements, and include members of various categories with different gender compositions. The EC members must be trained in ethics review and be able to review ethical and scientific issues related to clinical trials.

Per the Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, and the RegEthics, ECs should have at least seven (7) members. The EC-Guide and the RegEthics state that the ECs should be composed of multidisciplinary specialists in biomedicine, management, ethics, law, sociology, statistics, and other areas that collectively represent the qualifications and experience to provide a fair scientific and ethics review. The RegEthics states that in areas where minority ethnic groups reside, the institution should consider including members of those groups on the EC. The EC-Guide indicates that there should be one (1) member who does not belong to the institution and has no close relationship with the project researchers (the same member can meet both requirements). As delineated in the Measures-Ethics, EC members must be selected from experts in the fields of life sciences, medicine, bioethics, law, and people from outside the institution, and there must be members of different sexes. Ethnic minority members must be considered in ethnic minority areas. EC members must have the corresponding ethics review capabilities, and regularly receive training on ethical knowledge of life sciences and medical research and knowledge of relevant laws and regulations.

The Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, and the RegEthics provide that the EC can hire an independent consultant if necessary. The Measures-Ethics and the RegEthics state that the independent consultant advises on specific project issues under review and does not participate in the voting. The EC-Guide further indicates that there should be clear institutional regulations on the qualifications, hiring procedures, and job responsibilities of independent consultants, and the hiring process of independent consultants should be recorded and filed.

The EC-Guide and the RegEthics provide that the EC composition should include a chairperson and vice chairpersons, who are elected by committee members. The number of vice chairpersons is not specified in the guidelines. When the chairperson is absent, the deputy chair performs the chairperson’s duties. ECs should not accept any research project applications that do not comply with national laws and regulations. In addition, the EC should refuse to review any projects in which they have a conflict of interest. See the EC-Guide for additional guidance on managing ECs.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

As per the Measures-Ethics, the RegEthics, the EC-Guide, and the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, each institution must have written SOPs, including a process to be followed for conducting reviews. To ensure the independence, objectivity, and impartiality of the ethics review process, the Measures-Ethics stipulates that the SOPs must include conflict of interest management and quality control mechanisms. Further, the EC must formulate an ethics review system in emergency situations (e.g., epidemic outbreaks) and clarify the time limit for review.

Per the Measures-Ethics, scientific research managers and other relevant personnel must conduct bioethics education and training. The EC-Guide specifies that all committee members should undergo basic professional training in scientific research ethics before starting their EC service at a provincial or above-level scientific research course and receive an ethics training certificate. Participation in continuing education should be on a continuous basis to ensure improvement.

As delineated in the Measures-Ethics, the term of office for members of ECs that review life sciences and medical research involving people must not exceed one (1) year, and they may be re-elected. The EC must have one (1) chairman and several vice chairmen, who must be elected by EC members through consultation and then appointed by the institution. EC members, independent consultants, and their staff must sign confidentiality agreements on sensitive information learned during ethics review work. The EC must accept the supervision of the institution's management. The EC may decide to approve, disapprove, approve after revision, re-examine after revision, continue research, suspend, or terminate the research under review, and must explain its reasons. The decision must be approved by more than one-half of all members of the EC. Members must vote after full discussion of the ethical issues involved in the study, and opinions inconsistent with the review decision must be recorded in detail.

The RegEthics states that EC members should agree to disclose their names, occupations, and affiliations, and to sign the reviews, confidentiality agreements, and a conflict of interest declaration. Each EC member term is five (5) years, after which they can be reappointed. Each institution that establishes an EC should also provide financial compensation to its committee members. EC review and approval decisions must take place during formal meetings. The majority of the total EC membership should be present to conduct reviews.

In addition, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 requires the EC to establish and implement the following written documents:

Provisions on the composition, establishment, and filing of the EC
The meeting schedule, meeting notice, and meeting review process sequence
The initial review and follow-up review procedures of the EC
A rapid review and approval procedure for minor amendments to the experimental protocol agreed to by the EC
Procedures for promptly notifying researchers of review opinions
Procedures for appealing ethics review opinions
The RegEthics and the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 state that written records of all meetings and resolutions should be preserved for five (5) years following the completion of a clinical trial.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Overview

According to the EC-Guide, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, and the NMPA-No11-2017, the primary scope of information assessed by the ethics committee (EC) relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial, in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Declaration of Helsinki (CHN-84). Per the Measures-Ethics and the RegEthics, ethics reviews and relevant personnel must comply with the Constitution of the People's Republic of China and Chinese laws and regulations. The Measures-Ethics indicates that life science and medical research involving humans must respect research participants and follow the principles of beneficence, non-harm, and fairness, and protect privacy and personal information. Per the RegEthics and the EC-Guide, the EC must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable (See the Vulnerable Populations section for additional information about these populations). In addition, the EC is responsible for ensuring a competent review of all ethical aspects of the clinical trial protocol; evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants; confirming the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, and methods; and verifying the adequacy of confidentiality safeguards.

Per Measures-Ethics, life science and medical research involving humans is defined as research activities using biological samples and information data (including health records and behaviors) of research participants, specifically including the following:

Activities that use methods such as physics, chemistry, biology, and traditional Chinese medicine to conduct research on human reproduction, growth, development, aging, etc.
Activities that use methods such as physics, chemistry, biology, traditional Chinese medicine, psychology, and other methods to conduct research on human physiology, psychological behavior, pathological phenomena, disease etiology and pathogenesis, as well as disease prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation
Activities using new technologies or products to conduct experimental research on the human body
Activities that use methods such as epidemiology, sociology, and psychology to collect, record, use, report, or store biological samples, information data, and other scientific research materials (including health records, behaviors, etc.) related to life sciences and medical issues
The GeneEdit-Ethics states that human genome editing research should have important scientific and social value, and should be limited to medical interventions for treatment or prevention. Non-medical genomic changes to research participants are prohibited. Researchers and institutions should follow the GeneEdit-Ethics for principles and ethical behavior to guide human genome editing research.

Note that per the Measures-Ethics-Interp, the main framework and provisions of the Measures-Ethics and the RegEthics are generally consistent and both regulations should be followed. Some provisions in the newer Measures-Ethics have been refined and improved in combination with the requirements of new laws and regulations and the actual conditions of colleges, universities, and research institutes. The RegEthics will be reviewed and revised to closely align with the Measures-Ethics. (ClinRegs will monitor and update the China profile, as needed.)

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

As per the RegEthics, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the DRR, the DAL, and the SC-Opinions-No42, the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) and the EC must approve a clinical trial application prior to a sponsor initiating a clinical trial. As stated in the DRR, clinical trials of drugs must be reviewed and approved by an EC. The DRR indicates that the EC review may be submitted in parallel to the NMPA’s review, but the study cannot be initiated until after review and approval by the EC. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the RegEthics also state that the EC must review and approve any protocol amendments prior to those changes being implemented.

Per the Rules-MgmtHGR, the collection, preservation, use, and external provision of China’s human genetic resources (HGR) must comply with ethical principles and pass the ethics review of ECs that have been registered with the relevant management departments. Further, applications for administrative licenses for international scientific research cooperation on HGR must pass an ethics review in the respective countries (regions) where both parties are located. Where the foreign party is truly unable to provide the ethics review certification materials of the country (region) where it is located, it may submit the proof that the foreign party unit recognizes the ethics review opinions of the Chinese unit.

The Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, and the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 provide that the EC’s scope of review must include the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Whether the institutions and researchers are competent; the qualifications and experience of the investigator meet clinical research requirements
Whether the research plan meets the required scientific and ethical principles, has scientific and social value, does not violate the provisions of laws and regulations, and does not harm the public interest
The degree of risk compared to the expected study benefit
The informed consent process and whether the relevant information provided is complete and easy to understand, and whether the method for obtaining consent was appropriate
Whether confidentiality measures have been taken to protect the participants’ privacy, personal information, and data
Whether the guidelines for the selection and exclusion of participants are appropriate and fair
Whether the participants are clearly informed of their rights in the research, including the right to equal treatment and that they can withdraw from the research at any time without reason and not be treated unfairly because of this
Whether the participant received reasonable compensation for participating in the research, and in case of damage or death, whether the treatment and compensation measures are appropriate; participants must not be charged research-related fees for participating in the research
Whether there is a designated contact for handling and obtaining informed consent and answering questions related to participant safety
Whether appropriate measures are taken to minimize participant risks
Potential conflicts of interest
When conducting non-therapeutic clinical trials, if the participants’ informed consent is implemented by their guardians instead, whether the trial protocol gives full consideration to the corresponding ethical issues, laws, and regulations
Whether the corresponding ethical issues, laws, and regulations are fully considered in the trial plan if the trial protocol clearly states that the participants or their guardians cannot sign an informed consent form (ICF) before the trial in an emergency
Whether participants are forced or induced to participate in clinical trials due to improper influence, including whether the ICF has content that waives legal rights or exempts researchers, institutions, or sponsors from being responsible
Whether the method, content, and timing of the release of research results are reasonable
Per the Measures-Ethics and the EC-Guide, the EC will make one (1) of the following decisions (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Approval: The EC unconditionally approves an initial review of the research protocol and will conduct follow-up reviews. The research can start immediately after approval.
Approval after modification: The EC conditionally approves a research protocol if the research leader accepts the EC’s proposed amendments.
Review after modification: If the EC needs more substantive information about the research project under review, it will decide to suspend the deliberation until the committee receives new information.
Approve continuation of research.
Not approved: The EC votes against a research proposal. The reasons for disapproval must be communicated to the research leader, who is given an opportunity to defend the research.
Suspension or termination of research: The EC suspends or terminates a research project.
The Measures-Ethics specifies that the EC must conduct the review and issue its opinion within 30 days of acceptance of the materials.

The Measures-Ethics states that before the implementation of research approved by the EC, researchers, ECs, and institutions must truthfully, completely, and accurately upload information to the registration platform (CHN-53), including research, ethics review opinions, and institutional review opinions in accordance with the requirements of the national medical research registration and filing information system, and promptly update the information according to the progress of the research. Researchers, ECs, and institutions are encouraged to upload information in real time during the study management process.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 specifies that the EC must pay attention to and clearly require investigators to report in a timely manner the following: deviations or modifications to the trial protocol to eliminate emergency hazards to participants; changes that increase the risk to participants or significantly affect the implementation of clinical trials; all suspicious and unexpected serious adverse reactions; and new information that may adversely affect the safety of participants or the implementation of clinical trials. The EC has the right to suspend or terminate clinical trials, as needed. Finally, the EC must accept and properly handle requests from participants. Per the EC-Guide, if there are accidental injuries or violations during the research project, the EC has the right to request the suspension or termination of an approved research project. Further, the EC reviews amendments to the protocol and informed consent form, and reviews serious adverse events and violations of the protocol. The Measures-Ethics states that when a serious adverse event is reported, the EC must conduct a timely review to determine whether the measures taken by researchers to protect the personal safety and health rights and interests of research participants are adequate, reassess the risk-benefit ratio of the research, and issue review opinions.

As delineated in the NMPA-No34-2022, protocol changes that result in updating the investigator’s brochure, ICF, or other relevant documents should be reported to the EC by the sponsor. The Measures-Ethics indicates that if approved research requires revision of the research plan, informed consent, recruitment materials, or other materials provided to research participants, the researcher must submit the revised documents to the EC for review. Further, the EC must conduct follow-up reviews at least annually in accordance with relevant reports submitted by the investigators. The follow-up review must include the following considerations:

Whether the research is conducted in accordance with the approved research plan and reported in a timely manner
Whether the research content was changed without authorization during the research process
Whether changes or new information increase the risk to research participants or significantly affect the implementation of the research
Whether it is necessary to suspend or terminate the research early
Other content that needs to be reviewed
Per the EC-Guide, the EC has the right to request regular follow-up reviews of approved research projects based on the possibility and degree of research risks. The RegEthics provides that the EC must designate members to conduct follow-up examinations of approved research projects. The number of members for follow-up review must not be less than two (2), and the review is required to be reported to the EC. Further, the EC may apply to the provincial medical ethics expert committees to provide advice on the ethics review of research that involves a relatively high-risk or special population.

Expedited Review

As delineated in the Measures-Ethics, the EC may conduct expedited review of research in the following circumstances:

Research whose risk is not greater than the minimum risk
Research in which the approved research protocol is slightly modified and does not affect the risk-benefit ratio of the research
Follow-up review of approved research
Research conducted by multiple institutions, when the EC of the participating institution confirms the ethics review opinion issued by the lead institution, etc.
Where the situation is urgent, an ethics review must be promptly carried out. In the case of emergencies such as outbreaks, ethics reviews and review opinions are generally carried out within 72 hours, but the requirements and quality of ethics reviews must not be reduced. For expedited review, the EC chairman designates two (2) or more members to conduct the ethics review and issue review opinions. The review opinions must be reported at the EC meeting. If it is discovered during this review that there is a change in the risk-benefit ratio of the research, there is a disagreement among the review members, or the review members propose that a meeting review is required, etc., then a full review procedure must be held.

During an outbreak of an epidemic, the EC-Guide advises ECs to adhere to the highest scientific and ethical standards for independent review of the research project to ensure balancing of quality and timeliness. The materials provided by the researcher can be simplified according to the situation. The EC should pay special attention to the informed consent process as participants may be improperly exploited due to their obvious vulnerability, especially when it involves high-risk and risk-uncertain research. It should be ensured that participants choose to participate voluntarily and independently after being fully informed and fully understanding the possible risks of research. Research participants or the legal representative/guardian must be allowed to withdraw from research unconditionally at any stage. See the EC-Guide for additional guidance on the EC review when there is a major epidemic risk.

Multicenter Studies

Per the Measures-Ethics, research carried out in multiple institutions may establish collaborative mechanisms for ethics review, ensuring that all institutions follow the principles of consistency and timeliness. Both the lead institution and the participating institution must organize an ethics review. The EC of the participating institution must conduct a follow-up review of the research in which the institution participates. Where establishments cooperate with enterprises and other institutions to carry out life science and medical research involving humans, the institutions must fully understand the overall situation of the research, clarify the scope of use and handling methods of biological samples and information data through agreements subject to ethics review and follow-up review, and supervise their proper disposal after the research is completed.

Per the EC-Guide, the review of international cooperative research projects requires ethics review by the lead unit. For cooperative research projects conducted in China, the trial protocols should be submitted to the EC for a single-review process and should be consistent, though the EC will accept that informed consent may vary slightly in different institutions. The RegEthics also provides that multicenter research may establish a collaborative review mechanism to ensure that the research institutions of each project follow the principles of consistency and timeliness. The lead agency EC is responsible for project review and confirmation of the ethics review results of participating institutions. ECs of the participating institutions must conduct an ethics review of the research in which the institution participates in a timely manner and provide feedback to the lead agency for review.

Exemption from Ethics Review

The Measures-Ethics states that ethics review may be exempted where human information data or biological samples are used to carry out life science and medical research involving humans if the research does not cause harm to the human body or does not involve sensitive personal information or commercial interests. This is to reduce unnecessary burdens on scientific research personnel and promote the development of life science and medical research involving people. The exemption may apply in the following circumstances:

Using lawfully obtained public data or conducting research through data generated by observing and not interfering with public conduct
Using anonymized information and data to carry out research
Using existing human biological samples to carry out research, and the source of the biological samples complies with relevant laws and regulations and ethical principles; the relevant content and purpose of the research are within the scope of the informed consent; and the research does not involve the use of human germ cells, embryos, reproductive cloning, chimerism, and heritable gene manipulation
Carrying out research using human-derived cell lines or cell lines derived from biobanks, where the relevant content and purpose of the research are within the scope authorized by the provider, and do not involve activities such as human embryonic and reproductive cloning, chimerism, and heritable gene manipulation
Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
No applicable requirements.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Overview

Per the NMPA-NHC-No101-2019, the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) oversees and supervises the registration and filing of clinical trial institutions. Drug clinical trials must be conducted in registered clinical trial institutions that meet the applicable requirements, which include having an ethics committee (EC).

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

The RegEthics states that all biomedical research institutions in China should establish their own ECs. Per SC-Opinions-No42, the NMPA adopted a registration system for institutions with qualifying conditions to be entrusted to conduct clinical trials and operate ECs. An institution is entrusted to conduct clinical trials if it has an EC and the main investigators of clinical trials have senior professional titles and have participated in more than three (3) clinical trials, among other conditions. To apply for qualification, institutions must submit an application via the online filing system (CHN-82) and fulfill the requirements pursuant to the NMPA-NHC-No101-2019. Per the Measures-Ethics, institutions must register the EC within three (3) months of its establishment and upload the information to CHN-82. Medical and healthcare institutions must register with the appropriate oversight authority. Other institutions must register with the competent department at a higher level according to their administrative affiliation. The EC must submit the previous year's work report to the appropriate institutional department before March 31st of each year, including:

A list of personnel and resumes of committee members' work
The EC charter
Work systems or relevant work procedures
Other relevant materials required by the appropriate department
When the above information changes, the institution must promptly update the information to the appropriate institutional department.

As delineated in the RegEthics and interpreted in CHN-41, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for managing ECs nationwide, organizing the inspection and management of the national ethics review of biomedical research involving human beings, establishing the National Medical Ethics Expert Committee, and for developing policies relating to ethics review. The National Medical Ethics Expert Committee conducts research on major ethical issues in research involving humans and provides policy advice and guides the provincial ECs. Per CHN-3, China established a National Science and Technology Ethics Committee to strengthen the ethics governance system. Further, the SC-EthicalGov establishes principles and guides the committee in its responsibility to develop and coordinate the ethics governance system.

The EC-Guide describes the inspection and oversight mechanisms among the ECs in China. The National Medical Ethics Expert Committee formulates an inspection and evaluation indicator system for institutional ECs, including review quality, review efficiency, committee member capabilities, conflict of interest management, etc., to guide provincial medical ethics expert committees in carrying out ethics inspections within the region. The National Medical Ethics Expert Committee also inspects, evaluates, and supervises the work of provincial medical ethics expert committees. The provincial medical ethics expert committees are responsible for conducting regular inspections and evaluations of the ethics review work of medical institutions and regional ECs within the administrative area at the same level, making recommendations on how to manage non-standard ethics review work, and may establish an information disclosure mechanism based on actual conditions. Institutional ECs should check and evaluate the indicator system, continuously improve their operations, and actively cooperate in completing various inspections and evaluations. Regular self-evaluation is encouraged to improve work quality and review efficiency.

As delineated in the RegEthics, the provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal health authorities also have ECs set up under their own administration. The provincial medical ethics expert committees assists in promoting the institutionalization and standardization of the ethics review work of human biomedical research in its administrative region, and guides, inspects, and evaluates the work of the institutional ECs in the administrative region. It also performs training and consulting work. The local health administrative department at or above the county level supervises and manages the ethics review work of biomedical research involving people in its administrative region. Per the Measures-Ethics, provincial-level health departments, in conjunction with relevant departments, must formulate measures for the establishment and management of regional ECs. The regional EC must file with the provincial health department and upload information in CHN-82.

For additional information about oversight of ECs, including inspections, see the RegEthics.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Overview

As per the DRR, the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) grants permission for clinical trials to be conducted in China pursuant to the drug registration process, in accordance with the DAL, the VaccineLaw, and other laws and regulations. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the DRR, the DAL, and the SC-Opinions-No44 require the sponsor to obtain NMPA and ethics committee (EC) approvals of a clinical trial application. As stated in the DRR, EC review may be submitted in parallel to the NMPA’s review, but the study cannot be initiated until after review and approval by the EC.

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024). The NHC-HGRmgt states that the original application process and platform (CHN-6) remain unchanged. Per the Rules-MgmtHGR, the collection, preservation, use, and external provision of China’s HGR must comply with ethical principles and pass the ethics review of ECs that have been registered with the relevant management departments. Further, with applications for administrative licenses for international scientific research cooperation, the HGR project must pass an ethics review in the respective countries (regions). As part of the application filing for international cooperative clinical trials, NMPA approvals, notices, and/or filing registration must be obtained in advance, along with the EC approvals. Therefore, EC and MOST (now the NHC) review cannot occur in parallel. (Please note that SC-Order777 amends the MgmtHumanGen to reflect the transfer of HGR management from MOST to the NHC, but the Rules-MgmtHGR has not yet been amended to show the transfer.)

Regulatory Submission

National Medical Products Administration

The NMPA-No50-2018 establishes the broad submission procedures for clinical trials, which are detailed below through implementing regulations and guidance. The DRR states that a Chinese legal entity must submit the drug registration application. Clinical trial applications are also considered drug registration applications. Overseas drug manufacturers without legal representation in China must apply for drug registration through Chinese legal persons to handle relevant drug registration matters.

The applicant should prepare materials and apply for a communication meeting with the NMPA’s Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) in accordance with the requirements of the NMPA-No48-2020, which includes requirements for different categories of meetings involving applications for new drugs. The NMPA-No48-2020 includes the application form (Appendix 1) and communication meeting materials (Appendix 2). The meeting’s purpose is to determine the integrity of the clinical trial application data and the sponsor’s ability to ensure the participant’s safety. If existing or supplemental data can support the clinical trial, then the applicant can submit a clinical trial application after the meeting or after supplementing the data. The NMPA-No51-2023 reaffirms the required pre-trial meeting and states that the applicant must submit a communication application to the CDE before 1) applying for the first clinical trial of a new drug and 2) before completing the exploratory clinical trial and conducting the confirmatory (or critical) clinical trial. The NMPA-No23-2023 provides guidance on common issues and general requirements for the Phase III pre-clinical trial meeting with the CDE in regards to innovative drugs.

Per the NMPA-No50-2018, the applicant may directly submit a clinical trial application without requesting a communication meeting with the CDE in the following cases: they clearly understand the technical guidance; have sufficient experience in drug clinical trials; can ensure the quality of data in the application; or the application is for a multicentered international clinical trial being conducted in parallel that has permission to conduct the clinical trials in countries or regions with an established and functional regulatory and monitoring infrastructure. In addition, the NMPA-No48-2020 stipulates that the application for conditional approval and/or the application for priority review and approval procedures must be communicated and confirmed with the CDE before submittal. (See below for procedures on priority review and approval.)

CHN-14 states that Chinese legal entities must submit application materials to the NMPA/CDE for a formal process review (including checking the electronic materials as described below). NMPA will process clinical trial applications within five (5) working days if the study falls within the scope of its authority; the application materials are complete and comply with the prescribed format; and if all required supplementary materials are submitted. If accepted, the CDE then organizes and conducts its review of the clinical trial application on behalf of the NMPA. As required in the ElectronicApps-Rqts and the NMPA-No110-2022, all documents for drug registration applications (including clinical trial applications, letters of commitment, declarations, and supplemental material) must be submitted electronically on CD-ROM to the CDE, in accordance with the current regulations, technical requirements for electronic CD-ROMs of application materials, and electronic file structure of drug registration applications. The ElectronicApps-Rqts clarifies that the CDE no longer accepts paper documents for administrative licensing by mail, except for applications that were accepted before January 1, 2023 and must continue to submit supplementary material in paper format. The applicant or registered agent is required to electronically sign the electronic declaration materials; the application and electronic seal can be found in the CDE’s Applicant Window (CHN-58). For details on the cover requirements for CD-ROM cases and the cover of the file bag, refer to Annex 1 in ElectronicApps-Rqts.

As indicated in CDE-Reloctn, the applicant should fill in and submit the relevant information in the "Online Appointment for Submission of Materials" module under the "Online Appointment" item in the "Applicant's Window" column of CDE’s Applicant Window (CHN-58). To mail CDs and other application materials in electronic format, applicants should use the following mailing address:

Business Management Office of the Center for Drug Evaluation
State Drug Administration
Room 102, Building 2
District 2, No. 22 Guangde Street
Beijing Economic and Technological Development Zone
Beijing, 100076
P.R. China

Per the ElectronicApps-Rqts, after receiving the disc submitted by the applicant, the CDE will determine if the disc can be read normally, passes the electronic signature verification, and has no computer viruses. If the disc does not pass these reviews, the CDE will notify the applicant and request resubmittal; the original disc will be disposed of in accordance with the CDE’s destruction procedures. If accepted, the CDE will push the electronic documents to the "Drug Business Application System" and "Drug eCTD Registration System" and the applicant is notified by SMS.

The ElectronicApps-Rqts provides additional requirements on the arrangement of discs:

Submit one (1) complete set of electronic application materials on CD-ROM (including clinical trial database, if applicable) for review
Submit one (1) complete set of electronic declaration materials on CD-ROM (including clinical trial database, if applicable) for verification at the same time.
For clinical trial database data, the relevant materials must be prepared in a separate set of CD-ROMs.
Additionally, the ElectronicApps-Rqts states that within five (5) working days after the acceptance of the drug registration application, the applicant must upload a Microsoft Word file of the application materials (e.g., pharmacy, non-clinical, and clinical reviews) through the CDE’s Applicant Window (CHN-58). The documents related to pharmaceutical materials (active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), pharmaceutical excipients, and pharmaceutical packaging materials) should be uploaded as PDF files. Further, per the DRR, supplementary materials (e.g., clinical trial research materials, consultations, and data submittals) are handled via the CDE’s Applicant’s Window (CHN-58).

Note that per CHN-14, all application materials must be in Chinese with the original language attached, and materials in other languages can be attached as reference. Chinese translations should be consistent with the original text.

The NMPA-No44-2020, the NMPA-No43-2020, and the NMPA-No10-2018 require applicants to apply the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s M4: Common Technical Document for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (CTD) (CHN-38) to the registration applications for drugs, therapeutic biological products, and vaccines. See the NMPA-No16-2018 for guidance on Phase I clinical trial applications. To standardize the submission of drug clinical trial data, meet the newly revised drug registration application data requirements, and improve the efficiency of drug review, the NMPA-No16-2020 provides guidance on the content and format of clinical trial data. The guidance is based on the data submission requirements of international regulatory agencies, including the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC).

For administrative support, applicants can request a meeting and/or consult the NMPA’s Government Service Portal (CHN-71).

Bioequivalent Studies

Per the NMPA-No230-2015, for generic drugs, a bioequivalence study will only need to be filed with the NMPA. The applicant should submit record filing materials to the NMPA 30 days before submitting the bioequivalence studies. For the generic drug filing, the applicant must obtain EC approval and sign a clinical study agreement with the clinical site prior to filing the bioequivalent study. See CHN-70 for handling guidelines for bioequivalent drugs.

Priority and Special Procedures

In addition, the DRR authorizes regulatory pathways for priority review and approval (including for breakthrough therapeutic drugs), conditional approval and special approval procedures. Per CHN-69, after the registration application is transferred to the CDE, applicants can apply for accelerated review directly to the CDE at CHN-58. CHN-69 contains the application and additional procedures for submitting applications for priority review and approval. As per the SC-Opinions-No44, the NMPA-No230-2015, and the NMPA-No51-2016, a new drug classification system, priority review for innovative drugs and those deemed to have an urgent clinical need, and other changes help China to be more innovative and expedite reviews. As delineated in the NMPA-No23-2018, for drugs listed overseas and that treat seriously life-threatening conditions, if there is no ethnic difference in the study, they can submit the clinical trial data obtained overseas and directly apply for the drug listing registration.

Protocol Changes

As delineated in the NMPA-No34-2022, when there is a protocol change during a clinical trial, the sponsor should follow these submission guidelines:

For substantial changes that may significantly increase the risk to participant safety, the sponsor must submit a clinical trial application as per the instructions above
For substantial changes that do not significantly increase participant safety risk, but may significantly affect the scientific validity and the reliability of the data, the sponsor should submit a communication meeting application to the CDE (see above)
Non-substantive changes can be implemented after being approved by the EC and filed with the NMPA
After the protocol is changed, the sponsor must update the drug clinical trial registration (See the Initiation, Agreements & Registration section) and submit the relevant updates in progress reports
National Health Commission

Per the MgmtHumanGen and the Rules-MgmtHGR, the foreign entity and the Chinese entity must jointly file an application for approval to MOST (now the NHC) and pass an ethics review in the partners’ countries. The only exception to the MOST (now the NHC) approval requirement is international collaboration in clinical trials that do not involve the export of Chinese HGR materials such as organs, tissues, or cells comprising the human genome, genes, or other genetic substances—these must be filed with MOST (NHC), which will generate a record number (see below for steps) and pass an ethics review in the partners’ countries.

As stated in the HGR-AppGuide, the HGR license application must be submitted to NHC via the Human Genetic Resources Service System (CHN-6), including application information and supporting materials. After verification, the system posts updates for the applicant.

See HGR-InfoSys for background on the online platform and contact information. For help with the online platform, contact Zhu Min, NHC’s China Biotechnology Development Center, at 010-88225151 or 010-88225168; or the information system support at 17610386080.

Ethics Review Submission

Each institutional and regional EC has its own required submission procedures.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Regulatory Authority Requirements

National Medical Products Administration

As delineated in the NMPA-No51-2023, the applicant must submit the following materials to the National Medical Products Administration’s (NMPA) Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) to have a communication meeting prior to submitting a clinical trial application for an exploratory clinical trial:

The overall clinical development plan
A complete first clinical trial protocol
A risk management plan
A subsequent clinical trial protocol, if applicable
Non-clinical research review
Pharmaceutical research review, etc.
A clear statement of the issues to be communicated
Next, the NMPA-No51-2023 states that prior to completing the exploratory clinical trial, the applicant must submit the following to CDE for another meeting to discuss conducting the confirmatory (or critical) clinical trial and the subsequent clinical trial protocol:

A preliminary analysis of the results of the early clinical trials that have been conducted
A scientific, reasonable, complete, and feasible confirmatory (or critical) clinical trial protocol based on the existing clinical trial data
A risk management plan
A review of non-clinical studies
A review of pharmaceutical studies, etc.
Per the DRR, after completing the pharmacology, toxicology, and other studies supporting the clinical trials of the drug, the applicant must submit relevant research materials to the NMPA. When applying for drug registration, the applicant must provide true, sufficient, and reliable data, materials, and samples to prove the safety, effectiveness, and quality controllability of the drug. In cases where overseas research materials and data are used to support drug registration, its source, research institution, or laboratory conditions, quality system requirements, and other management conditions should conform to prevailing international principles and applicable Chinese drug registration management requirements. CHN-14, CHN-70, and CHN-69 contain application materials and handling guidelines covering domestic drug and biological product clinical trial applications; imported drug and biological product clinical trial applications; priority review application procedures; and bioequivalence filing procedures. In general, the applications require information about the drug (e.g., names, formulation and ingredients, indications, and packaging), patents, the applicant, and the institution(s). In addition, the applications require a declaration attesting that the application and associated materials comply with the DAL, the DRR, and other applicable laws and regulations. The application and submitted data and samples must be true and legal, and they should not infringe on the rights and interests of others. The content of the electronic file submitted must be the same as the printed file. If any data is found to be false, the applicant bears the legal consequences caused by it.

The NMPA-No51-2023 requires the applicant to submit the following materials with the clinical trial application, in accordance with the NMPA-No44-2020 and the NMPA-No43-2020:

A complete clinical research and development protocol
A complete plan for the proposed clinical trial
A risk management plan
A framework for the subsequent clinical trial plan (if applicable)
The NMPA-No16-2018 provides guidance on technical information to be included in the application dossier for Phase I clinical trials:

Introductory description and overall research plan
Researcher’s manual (Investigator’s Brochure (IB))
Clinical trial plan
Pharmacy research information
Pharmacology and toxicology information
Description of previous clinical use experience
Overseas research material
Per the SC-Opinions-No42, the NMPA-No10-2018, and CHN-14, that applicants should apply the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s M4: Common Technical Document for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (CTD) (CHN-38) to the registration applications for drugs, therapeutic biological products, and vaccines.

See CHN-20 for additional analyses and overview of the China clinical trial application submission content.

National Health Commission

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024. Please note that SC-Order777 amends the MgmtHumanGen to reflect the transfer of HGR management from MOST to the NHC)). The NHC-HGRmgt states that the original application process and platform (CHN-6) remain unchanged.

The MgmtHumanGen requires that applications for a license to collect or preserve HGR meet the following conditions:

Applicants prove legal person status
The purpose of collection and/or preservation is clear and legal
The collection and/or plan is reasonable
In the case of preservation, the premises where the HGR will be deposited is legal
Proof of passing ethics review
Having a department and management system responsible for the management of collecting and/or preserving the HGR
Having premises, facilities, equipment, and personnel suitable for collection and/or preservation activities
As delineated in the MgmtHumanGen, the application for international collaborative scientific research using China’s HGR must demonstrate:

The research is not harmful to the public health, national security, or social public interests of China
The two (2) parties to the cooperation are a Chinese entity and a foreign entity with legal person status and have the basis and ability to carry out relevant work
The purpose and content of the cooperative research are clear and legal, and the duration is reasonable
The cooperative research plan is reasonable
The HGR to be used are of legal origin, and their types and quantities are consistent with the research content
The research passed an ethics review of the respective countries (regions) of the cooperation parties
The ownership of the research results is clear, and there is a reasonable and clear profit distribution plan
Information on the submission content for the HGR export license is summarized in the Specimen Import & Export section.

Ethics Committee Requirements

Each ethics committee (EC) has its own application form and clearance requirements that can differ significantly regarding the number of copies to be supplied and application format requirements.

The following list was compiled from the Measures-Ethics and the RegEthics to exemplify the common elements shared by the various application forms (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Application for Human Research Ethics Review (See CHN-27 for a sample institutional application)
Application Protocol for Results of Research or Related Technologies
Protocol
Sample ICF (See Children/Minors section for additional information)
Case Report Form
Principal investigator(s) CV(s)
NMPA approval letter
Certificate of Analysis for the drug issued by the National Institutes for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC) or corresponding provincial, autonomous region, or municipal institutes
IB
Any additional feedback from other ECs participating on the protocol
Statement of planned tasks
Letter of intention for cooperation
Letter of commitment on the reliability of research materials
Scientific opinions
Statement of no conflict of interest
Proof of the source of biological samples and information data
Site list
Site profile(s)
Product literature
Insurance policy (if any)
Materials provided to participants
Information on the lead research investigator; the legal qualification certificate of the institution; and the source of research funding
Recruitment advertisements and their release forms
An explanation of the form of publication of research results
Other relevant materials that the EC believes need to be submitted
Clinical Protocol

As delineated in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the ICH’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), the clinical protocol should include the following elements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

General information
Background information
Trial topic, purpose(s), and objective(s)
Sponsor name and address
Trial site location
Principal investigator(s) name(s), qualification(s), and address(es)
Trial design, random selection method, and blinding level
Inclusion criteria; participant treatment, inclusion, exclusion, and release procedures; and method of grouping participants
Form, dosage, route, method, and frequency of administration; treatment period; usage order of concomitant medicines; and packaging and labeling description
Investigational product registration, usage record, delivery, handling and storage conditions (See Investigational Products topic for detailed coverage of this subject)
Efficacy assessment
Safety assessment
Statistics
Direct access to source data/documents
Quality control/quality assurance
Ethics
Data handling/recordkeeping
Financing/insurance
Clinical observations, on-site visits, and measures to ensure the participant’s compliance with trial procedures
Rules regarding clinical trial termination and completion
Adverse event recording requirements, and serious adverse event reporting methods (See Safety Reporting section for additional information)
Proposed trial schedule and completion date
Publication policy
For complete protocol requirements, please refer to Chapter 6 of the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and Section 6 of CHN-37.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Overview

As stated in the DRR, ethics committee (EC) review may be submitted parallel to the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) review, but the study cannot be initiated until after review and approval by the EC.

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024). The Bioscrty-Law, the MgmtHumanGen, and the Rules-MgmtHGR, delineate that MOST (now the NHC) is responsible for China's management of HGR, which includes reviewing and approving research. Per the Rules-MgmtHGR, the collection, preservation, use, and external provision of China’s HGR must comply with ethical principles and pass the ethics review of ECs that have been registered with the relevant management departments. As part of the application filing for international cooperative clinical trials, NMPA approvals, notices, and/or filing registration must be obtained in advance. In addition, EC approvals must be submitted with the filing, so therefore cannot occur in parallel. (Please note that SC-Order777 amends the MgmtHumanGen to reflect the transfer of HGR management from MOST to the NHC, but the Bioscrty-Law and the Rules-MgmtHGR have not been amended to show the transfer.)

Regulatory Authority Approval

National Medical Products Administration

Per the DRR, upon application submittal, the NMPA will complete the administrative examination for completeness within five (5) days of receiving the application, and issue a notice of acceptance. If the application does not meet the technical requirements for review, the NMPA will notify the applicant, who must submit the additional information within five (5) days of the notice. According to CHN-14, the NMPA will process clinical trial applications within five (5) working days if the study falls within the scope of its authority; the application materials are complete and comply with the legally-prescribed format; and the applicant submits all supplementary application materials in accordance with the NMPA’s requirements. Per the DRR, the NMPA-No50-2018, and CHN-14, a clinical trial application will be considered approved after 60 working days if the applicant does not receive a rejection or an inquiry for clarification from the NMPA. These procedures do not apply in every situation and additional reforms are provided below.

The DRR indicates that the following is not included in the above time limits:

Time taken by the applicant for supplementary information, rectification after verification, and verification of production processes, quality standards, and instructions as required
Delays in the time of verification, inspection, and expert consultation meetings
If the review and approval procedure is suspended, the time occupied during the period of suspension of the review and approval procedure
Time taken by the initiation of overseas verification
The application review by the Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) and inspections and testing by National Institutes for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC) can affect the timeline beyond 60 days, as needed. The CDE conducts technical reviews and the NIFDC tests drug samples. The NMPA-No51-2023 specifies that if necessary, an expert consultation meeting may be held. For clinical trials that are approved after review, the technical review team’s conclusion and associated "Clinical Trial Approval Notice" must clearly state the indications, clinical trial protocol title, number, version number, version date, etc. The review team’s conclusion and notice may propose revisions or suggestions to the clinical trial protocol if necessary. For clinical trial protocols that require revisions, CDE will notify the applicant through a professional inquiry letter, clearly informing the applicant of the problems and revision opinions in the current protocol. The applicant must submit a revised clinical trial protocol within five (5) days, following the guidance in the Prcdrs-Changes.

According to the NMPA-No82-2020, the NMPA timelines for review and decisions for expedited applications are as follows: The CDE will review the application for breakthrough drug procedures submitted by the applicant and, if necessary, organize an expert advisory committee for demonstration. The CDE must report the review results to the applicant within 45 days after receiving the application. If it is necessary to extend the review time limit, the extended time limit must not exceed one-half of the original review time limit. The CDE must publicize the specific information and reasons for the types of drugs to be included in the breakthrough therapy program, including the name of the drug, the applicant, the proposed indication (or functional indication), the application date, and the reason for the proposed inclusion. If there is no objection within five (5) days of the public announcement, it will be included in the breakthrough treatment drug program; if an objection is raised against the publicly announced product, a written opinion must be submitted to the CDE within five (5) days; the CDE must organize another review and make a decision within 15 days and notify all relevant parties.

Per the NMPA-No79-2018, for applications to conduct clinical trials with drugs treating rare diseases with urgently needed drugs already on the market in the United States, Europe, and Japan in the past decade, the CDE completes the technical review within three (3) months after acceptance; for other overseas new drugs, the technical review is completed within six (6) months after acceptance.

The NMPA-No21-2024 describes NMPA’s pilot work plan for optimizing the review and approval of clinical trials for innovative drugs. This initiative aims to review and approve innovative drug clinical trial applications within 30 business days (a reduction from the 60 days as described above in the normal procedures). The applicant must initiate the clinical trial within 12 weeks after the approval of the clinical trial application. The pilot work will last for one (1) year and the experience of the pilot work will be summarized in July 2025. For application and eligibility details see NMPA-No21-2024 and Scope of Assessment section.

For additional details on other expedited review pathways, see the Scope of Assessment section.

National Health Commission

Per the HGR-AppGuide, for HGR license applications, the NHC will pre-screen the electronic application to ensure it is complete. If the application does not pass, then the applicant will have one (1) opportunity to correct the submission. Per Rules-MgmtHGR, MOST (now the NHC) must make an administrative licensing decision on HGR license applications within 20 working days of acceptance. HGR-AppGuide reiterates the 20 working-day deadline by NHC, the agency currently authorized to approve HGC licenses. The Rules-MgmtHGR states that where an administrative licensing decision cannot be made within 20 working days, it may be extended by 10 working days with the approval of MOST (now the NHC), and the reason for the extension must be notified to the applicant. If it is necessary to conduct hearings, inspections, testing, quarantine, appraisals, and technical reviews, this additional time required must not be counted within the time limit, and the applicant must be notified in writing of the required time.

Ethics Committee Approval

In accordance with the Measures-Ethics, the EC must carry out an ethics review and issue its opinion within 30 days of acceptance. In urgent situations, an ethics review must be promptly carried out. In the case of emergencies such as outbreaks, ethics reviews and review opinions are generally carried out within 72 hours, and the requirements and quality of ethics reviews must not be reduced. Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), the institutional EC should review a proposed clinical trial within a reasonable time. The EC’s recommendations should be issued in writing and should indicate an approval; an approval after necessary modifications have been made; a disapproval; or a decision to terminate or suspend an already approved trial.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Overview

Per the DRR, clinical trials must be conducted in institutions conducting drug clinical trials that comply with relevant regulations, and abide by the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, including written approval from the ethics committee (EC) to the researcher before clinical trial implementation. Further, clinical trials of vaccines must be implemented or organized by China’s designated three-level medical institutions or disease prevention and control institutions at or above the provincial level that meet the prescribed conditions.

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024). The Bioscrty-Law, the MgmtHumanGen, and the Rules-MgmtHGR delineate that MOST (now the NHC) is responsible for China's management of HGR, which includes reviewing and approving research before initiation. Per the Rules-MgmtHGR, clinical trials involving the collection, preservation, use, and export of China’s HGR must be approved by ECs in the relevant institutions. Further, applications for administrative licenses for international cooperation clinical trials (without exports) using HGR must pass an ethics review in the partner countries and be filed with MOST (now the NHC) before initiating the study. The Rules-MgmtHGR also state that clinical trial applications must pass a security review organized by MOST (now the NHC) if the study’s provision or opening of HGR information to foreign entities may impact China’s public health, national security, or the social public interest.

Clinical Trial Agreement

As delineated in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), the sponsor must sign an agreement or contract with the participating institution(s). The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 also states that before the trial begins, the sponsor and the investigator must sign a written agreement regarding the trial protocol, monitoring, auditing, and standard operating procedures, as well as each party’s responsibilities during the trial.

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the agreement must include the following elements:

Compliance with this specification and relevant clinical trial laws and regulations during the implementation of clinical trials
Implementation of the trial protocol agreed to by the sponsor and investigator, and approved by the EC
Compliance with data recording and reporting procedures
Consent to supervision and inspection
Retention period of necessary documents related to clinical trials
The agreement on publishing articles and intellectual property rights
Clinical Trial Registration

Per the DRR, the sponsor must register the drug clinical trial plan and other information on the drug clinical trial registration and information disclosure platform before launching the drug clinical trial. The NMPA-No9-2020 requires the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA)'s Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) to establish and maintain this registry (CHN-53). Before starting a clinical trial, the clinical trial information must be registered in any of these situations:

The clinical trial has been approved by the NMPA
The clinical trial of a chemical drug bioequivalence test was recorded and the record number obtained
Phase IV clinical trials and post-marketing studies were conducted in accordance with the requirements of the drug registration certificate or NMPA notice
Other situations required for registration according to the NMPA
Also see the handling guideline for clinical trial registration (CHN-13) for more information and frequently asked questions.

Governance

Pursuant to the NHC-ClinProjMgmt, medical institutions must develop internal rules and standard operating procedures (SOPs) for administering clinical studies; centralize financial management of clinical study projects; and maintain a project-based approval system and supervision throughout the study process. In addition to having an EC, medical institutions must also establish a Clinical Study Administration Committee and a subordinate body, and a Clinical Study Administration Division to handle daily project administration. For detailed requirements, see the NHC-ClinProjMgmt.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Safety Reporting Definitions

In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of China’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – All adverse medical events that occur after participants receive the experimental drugs. They can be manifested as symptoms and signs, diseases, or abnormal laboratory tests, but they may not be causally related to the experimental drugs
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life threatening, requires hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity, or causes a congenital anomaly/birth defect after the participant receives the experimental drug during a clinical trial
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – Any adverse or undesired reactions that may be related to the experimental drugs that occur during clinical trials. There is at least a reasonable possibility of the causal relationship between the experimental drug and the adverse event (i.e., the correlation cannot be ruled out)
Suspicious and Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) – Suspicious and unexpected serious clinical manifestations that exceed the existing information, such as the Investigator's Brochure (IB) of the trial drug, the instructions of the marketed drug, or the summary of product characteristics
In addition, the G-SftyRptStds includes “Serious Adverse Drug Reactions” (SADRs) as well as other important medical events, which require medical judgement to determine if measures are needed to prevent the occurrence of one (1) of the preceding.

See the NMPA-No31-2024 for NMPA’s guidance on evaluating the correlation between AEs and drugs used in clinical trials.

Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the investigator should immediately report all SAEs in writing to the sponsor, and then provide a detailed and written follow-up report in a timely manner. However, this does not include SAEs that do not need to be reported immediately per the trial protocol or other documents (such as the investigator’s brochure). SAE reports and follow-up reports should indicate the participant’s identification code in the clinical trial, not the participant’s real name, citizenship number, and residential address. AEs and abnormal laboratory values that are important for the safety evaluation specified in the test plan must be reported to the sponsor in accordance with the requirements and time limit of the test plan. For reports involving deaths, the investigator should provide the sponsor and the ethics committee (EC) with other required information, such as autopsy reports and final medical reports.

The Measures-Ethics state that for research that has been approved for implementation, researchers must immediately report SAEs that occur during the research process to the EC. The EC must conduct a timely review to determine whether the measures taken by researchers to protect the personal safety and health rights and interests of research participants are adequate, reassess the risk-benefit ratio of the research, and issue review opinions.

Sponsor Responsibilities

Per the DRR, the sponsor must regularly submit a safety update report to the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA)'s Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) via the Applicant’s Window (CHN-58). The safety update report during the research and development period should be submitted once a year, and within two (2) months after the full year following approval of the drug clinical trial. The CDE may require the sponsor to adjust the reporting cycle based on the review situation. Additional guidance on the safety update report is provided in the NMPA-No7-2020 and the NMPA-No65-2021. For international multicenter clinical trials, NMPA-No2-2015 states that sponsors should unify the collection and evaluation methods of AEs, use a unified glossary to code AEs, and establish a unified safety database for the collection and evaluation of SAEs. AE or SAE reports should comply with the relevant national and regional requirements.

The DRR requires the sponsor to report SUSARs and other potentially serious safety risks to the CDE in a timely manner in accordance with relevant requirements. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the G-SftyRptStds specify that the sponsor is responsible for the safety assessment of the drugs during the trial period. The G-SftyRptStds and the NMPA-No65-2021 state that during the clinical trial, the sponsor judges whether SUSARs are related to the drug. When the sponsor and the investigator cannot agree on the causal relationship between the AE and the drug, the experimental drug should not be ruled out and it must be reported. Also see NMPA-No102-2019 for guidelines on classifying AEs in clinical trials of investigational vaccines.

The NMPA-No16-2023 and the NMPA-No5-2020 state that a sound pharmacovigilance system should be established to monitor safety risks during drug clinical trials, which should include comprehensive drug data collection and risk monitoring, identification, assessment, and control. In addition, safety problems and risks should be discovered in a timely manner, and necessary risk management measures should be taken proactively, such as adjusting clinical trial plans, and suspending or terminating clinical trials, etc. The NMPA-No5-2020 provides guidance on evaluating and managing safety issues and requires sponsors to actively cooperate with clinical trial institutions and other relevant parties to strictly implement the main responsibility of safety risk management.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 requires the sponsor to promptly notify the investigator, the clinical trial institution, and the drug regulatory authority of issues discovered in the clinical trial that may affect the safety of participants, the implementation of the clinical trial, and the consent of the ECs. Further, the sponsor must promptly report SUSARs to all participating investigators, clinical trial institutions, and ECs; sponsors must also report SUSARs to drug regulatory and health authorities. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 states that after receiving safety information from the sponsor, the investigator should sign the documentation and consider whether to treat the participant and make corresponding adjustments to the protocol.

The NMPA-No65-2021 and the G-SftyRptStds specify reporting timelines for unexpected death or serious life-threatening adverse reactions. The sponsor must submit the report as soon as possible after first learned, but not more than seven (7) days; and detailed follow-up information should be submitted within the next eight (8) days. For SUSARs, the report should be submitted as soon as possible after the first notification, but not more than 15 days. In addition to individual SUSAR reports, other potentially serious safety risk information should be reported to the CDE as soon as possible, and medical treatments should be decided upon for each situation. Generally, information that significantly affects the evaluation of the drug’s risks and benefits, changes in drug usage, or information that affects the overall drug development process, falls into this category. Domestic and foreign safety reports should be reported in Chinese. Further, the DAL states that if there is a safety problem or risk during the clinical trial, the sponsor must adjust the clinical trial plan, suspend or terminate the clinical trial, and report the issue to the NMPA.

See NMPA-No60-2021 for guidance on writing safety reference information in the investigator’s manual.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

As per the NMPA-No50-2018, the NMPA-No10-2018, and the G-SftyRptStds, investigators must comply with the rapid reporting requirements in the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s E2A Guideline, Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (CHN-39), and ICH E2B(R3), Electronic Transmission of Individual Case Safety Reports (CHN-40). As indicated in the G-SftyRptStds, all SUSARs from clinical trials should be reported in compliance with E2A and E2B(R3). To comply with these requirements, the project’s electronic safety database must meet the E2B(R3)’s XML format and be submitted to the CDE in Chinese (CHN-58). Potentially serious security risks can be sent as a “Quick Report” through e-mail to: lcqjywjj@cde.org.cn. See NMPA-No17-2023 for frequently asked questions and answers related to rapid safety reporting. Additional questions pertaining to rapid reporting can be sent to ywjjxtwt@cde.org.cn.

According to the NMPA-No230-2015, in clinical trials of new drugs, which now only require a one-time approval, after the completion of Phase I and Phase II trials, the applicant should submit all test results and demonstrate that no safety problems were found before beginning the next phase of the trial. Furthermore, NMPA-No230-2015 states that the applicant must submit all adverse event data on time.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) require the investigator to submit an annual report on the clinical trial to the ethics committee (EC). In addition, the investigator must provide a progress report in accordance with requirements established by the EC. When there is a situation that significantly affects the implementation of clinical trials or increases the risks to participants, the investigator should report it in writing to the sponsor, the EC, and the clinical trial institution as soon as possible. The Measures-Ethics reiterates that the researcher must submit progress reports. The NMPA-No2-2015 requires sponsors and researchers to submit the progress of international multicenter clinical trials to the EC, including but not limited to enrollment, important decisions of the independent data supervision committee (if applicable), and safety information in their own countries and other countries/regions, so as to facilitate the EC’s understanding of the overall situation of the trial, conduct follow-up reviews, and protect the safety and rights of participants.

According to the NMPA-No230-2015, in clinical trials of new drugs, which now only require a one-time approval, after the completion of Phase I and Phase II trials, the applicant should submit all test results and demonstrate that no safety problems were found before beginning the next phase of the trial. Furthermore, NMPA-No230-2015 states that the applicant must submit an annual report on time.

CHN-37 states that the investigator should promptly provide written reports to the sponsor and the institutional EC on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to participants. In addition, the investigator should submit written summaries of the trial status to the institutional EC annually, or more frequently, if requested by the institutional EC. Per the Measures-Ethics researchers must promptly submit reports on suspension, termination, and completion to the EC.

Final Report

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, after the clinical trial is completed, the investigator must report to the clinical trial institution. The investigator must provide the EC with a summary of the clinical trial results and provide the sponsor with the clinical trial related reports required by the drug regulatory authority. Per the DRR, the sponsor must register clinical trial results on the Applicant’s Window (CHN-58).

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

As per the DRR, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), a sponsor is defined as a company, institution, or organization that initiates a clinical trial, and is responsible for managing, financing, and monitoring the trial. The DRR further specifies that the enterprise or institution applicant must be able to bear corresponding legal responsibilities. Per the DRR, applicants who are approved to carry out clinical trials of drugs are referred to as “sponsors” of clinical trials. If the sponsor changes, the changed sponsor must bear the relevant responsibilities and obligations of the drug clinical trial.

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37, a sponsor can authorize a contract research organization (CRO) to carry out certain work and obligations regarding the clinical trial. The sponsor can entrust part or all of the work and tasks of its clinical trial to the CRO, but the sponsor is still the ultimate person responsible for the quality and reliability of the clinical trial data and should supervise the various tasks undertaken by the CRO. The CRO must implement quality assurance and quality control measures. Any work entrusted by the sponsor to the CRO must be documented in a signed agreement. The sponsor is still responsible for work and tasks that are not clearly entrusted to the CRO. The requirements for sponsors in this specification apply to CROs that undertake the work and tasks related to sponsors.

A sponsor may be domestic or foreign; however, per the DRR and CHN-11, a Chinese legal entity must submit the clinical trial application.

Per the DAL, the sponsor is also referred to as the “holder” of the drug registration certificate, which is an entity that has obtained a drug registration certificate and includes institutions that are responsible for clinical trials. The legal representative and principal person holding the drug registration certificate is fully responsible for the quality of the drug used in a clinical trial. When the holder of the certificate is an overseas entity, their designated legal person in China must fulfill the same obligations as the holder of the drug registration certificate and bear joint and several liability with the holder of the drug registration certificate.

Definition of Foreign Entities in Regard to Collecting or Preserving Human Genetic Resources

For purposes of obtaining a human genetic resources (HGR) license, the HGR-AppGuide defines foreign entities as institutions established or actually controlled by overseas organizations or individuals including the following:

A foreign organization or individual that holds or indirectly holds more than 50% of the shares, equity, voting rights, property shares, or other similar interests of an institution
A foreign organization or individual that holds or indirectly holds less than 50% of the shares, equity, voting rights, property shares, or other similar rights and interests of the institution, but the voting rights or other rights and interests they enjoy are sufficient to control or exert significant influence on the decision-making, management, and other behaviors of the institution
Foreign organizations or individuals, through investment relationships, agreements, or other arrangements, are able to control or exert significant influence on the decision-making, management, and other behaviors of the institution
Other circumstances prescribed by laws, administrative regulations, and rules.
The HGR-AppGuide indicates that domestically-invested actual controlling institutions located in Hong Kong and Macao are regarded as Chinese units.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Overview

Per the DRR, drug clinical trials must be conducted in institutions conducting drug clinical trials that comply with relevant regulations and abide by the clinical trial quality management standards. As set forth in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and institution(s) for the clinical trial, taking into account the appropriateness and availability of the study site and facilities. The sponsor must also ensure that the investigator(s) are qualified by training and experience. Prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s) and the institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and an investigator’s brochure (IB). Additionally, the sponsor must define and allocate all study related duties and responsibilities to the relevant parties participating in the study. Furthermore, the sponsor must sign an agreement or contract with the participating institution(s). The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 indicates that for clinical trials involving multiple institutions, the sponsor must be responsible for selecting the team leader unit. (See the Submission Content section for additional information on clinical trial application requirements). See the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 for additional details on investigator and clinical trial institution requirements.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 states that investigators and clinical trial institutions must possess the appropriate qualifications, training, and experience to assume responsibility for the trial. Further, they must be familiar with the trial protocol, IB, and related materials and information provided by the sponsor. They must be familiar with and abide by clinical trial regulations and laws and keep an authorization form for the division of responsibilities signed by the investigator. Researchers and clinical trial institutions must accept the supervision and inspection organized by the sponsor as well as by the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA). In addition, with the sponsor’s consent, investigators and clinical trial institutions can authorize qualified individuals or units to undertake clinical trial-related responsibilities and functions.

With regard to institutions, the DRR further delineates that drug clinical trials must be conducted in institutions that have the corresponding required conditions and are registered. For example, vaccine clinical trials must be implemented or organized by China’s designated three-level medical institutions or disease prevention and control institutions at or above the provincial level that meet the required conditions.

Institutional Registration

Per the SC-Opinions-No42 and the NMPA-NHC-No101-2019, the NMPA adopted a registration system for institutions with qualifying conditions to be entrusted to conduct clinical trials and operate ethics committees (ECs). This reform eases institutional burdens by removing the pre-approval accreditation requirements. Among other conditions, the NMPA-NHC-No101-2019 specifies that an institution is entrusted to conduct clinical trials if the main investigators of clinical trials have senior professional titles and have participated in more than three (3) clinical trials. The main investigator must supervise the implementation of drug clinical trials and the performance of each researcher in the performance of their work duties and take measures to implement the quality management of drug clinical trials to ensure the reliability and accuracy of the data. Institutions conducting drug clinical trials must submit a work summary report of clinical trials in the previous year before January 31 of each year. NMPA-No1-2024 provides guidance and templates to institutions conducting drug clinical trials on filling out this annual work summary report. NMPA-NHC-No101-2019 indicates that the NMPA is establishing a record management information platform for the registration and operation management of institutions conducting drug clinical trials, as well as the supervision and inspection by drug regulatory agencies.

For additional details on the registration conditions, operations management, supervision, and inspection of institutions, see the NMPA-NHC-No101-2019. Also see CHN-12 for additional details on registering institutions to carry out clinical trials in China.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

The DRR requires foreign applicants/sponsors to designate Chinese legal entities to handle relevant drug registration matters.

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, the National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024).

Per the Rules-MgmtHGR, when data or information on human genetic resources (HGR) is provided or made available for use by foreign organizations, individuals, and institutions, the Chinese entity must notify MOST (now the NHC) in advance and may be required to pass a security review. The notification must report on the following:

The purpose and use of providing or opening up the use of China’s HGR information to foreign entities
The HGR data and backup copy of the information
The basic circumstances of the foreign entities receiving the HGR information
Risk assessments for the protection of Chinese HGR to foreign entities
This notification is not required during international scientific research that is licensed/recorded, where the Chinese unit provides the foreign party with information on HGR generated by the cooperation, and if the international cooperation agreement has stipulated that it will be used by the two (2) partners.

Note, that the Rules-MgmtHGR adopts a broad definition of “foreign units” that includes foreign organizations and institutions, as well as entities established or under “actual control” by foreign entities or individuals. See the Rules-MgmtHGR and Rules-MgmtHGR-Interp for specific guidelines for determining actual control.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, CHN-37, and the NMPA-No65-2021 recommend establishing a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial. The EC-Guide indicates that any DSMB reports should be submitted to the EC during follow-up reviews, if applicable.

As delineated in G-SftyRptStds and the NMPA-No65-2021, the sponsor should appoint fulltime staff to monitor clinical trial safety information and manage serious adverse event reporting. Relevant standard operating procedures should be established, and all relevant personnel should be trained. The sponsor is also responsible to ensure staff understand the latest security information, conduct timely risk assessments, provide relevant information to inform participants and interested parties, and quickly report unexpected serious adverse reactions. Annex 3 to NMPA-No50-2018 requires that application materials for Phase I clinical trials focus on participant safety and describe the establishment of a drug safety committee and a pharmacovigilance system based on the clinical trial protocol.

NMPA-No2-2015 states that in large-scale international multicenter drug clinical trials, the establishment of independent data monitoring committees and endpoint determination committees for key indicators is usually considered. For critical clinical trials with relatively large sample sizes and relatively long research times, especially those driven by clinical events, it is necessary to establish an independent data supervision committee and establish clear working mechanisms and procedures. NMPA recommends that for studies in which Chinese patients account for more than 2%, Chinese experts be included in the global core independent data monitoring board. For situations where human factors may affect the determination of research results, such as international multicenter drug clinical trials where imaging evaluation results are the key evaluation endpoints, it is necessary to establish a unified endpoint judgment committee for the main research indicators to uniformly conduct independent evaluation and judgment of the main research indicators.

Multicenter Studies

Per NMPA-No2-2015, for international multicenter drug clinical trials, sponsors should ensure that investigators have the qualifications and ability to undertake the clinical trial. Sponsors should provide unified training for researchers, including training on clinical trial protocols, standard operating procedures, test record forms, computer use, etc. The training should clearly explain and translate various definitions; unify diagnosis, efficacy, and safety evaluation indicators; and ensure the consistency of researchers' understanding of clinical trial protocols and evaluation of relevant indicators.

In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37, to carry out multicenter clinical trials, the sponsor must ensure that all centers participating in the clinical trial comply with the trial protocol. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 specifies additional sponsor requirements:

Provide the same test plan to each center; each center must comply with the same unified evaluation standards for clinical and laboratory data and instructions for filling out the case report form (CRF)
Ensure each center uses the same CRF to record the test data obtained in clinical trials
Indicate in the trial protocol if the investigator needs to increase the collection of experimental data, and provide the investigator with an additional CRF
Develop a written document clarifying the responsibilities of the investigators in each center before the start of the clinical trial
Ensure communication among researchers in each center
The NMPA-No35-2017 delineates that researchers can conduct Phase I of multi-regional clinical trials (MRCT) of imported investigational new drugs and therapeutic biological products (excluding vaccines) simultaneously in China. Upon completion of a MRCT in China, the marketing application of the imported drug can be submitted immediately and should comply with the DRR. See Submission Content section.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Insurance

As set forth in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the sponsor is responsible for providing the investigator and clinical trial institution with legal and economic insurance or a guarantee related to the clinical trial, which must be compatible with the nature and degree of risk of the clinical trial. This insurance should not include damage caused by the investigator and the clinical trial institution itself. The International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) guides sponsors on providing insurance. See CHN-11 for an analysis of clinical trial insurance in China.

Per NMPA-No2-2015, for insurance provided by overseas insurance companies in international multicenter clinical trials, the sponsor should ensure that participants in China can effectively and fully claim compensation, and give priority to protecting the rights and interests of participants.

Compensation

Injury or Death

Per the Measures-Ethics, when research participants suffer research-related damages, they must receive timely and free treatment, and they must be compensated in accordance with laws and regulations and the agreement of both parties. In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the EC-Guide, the sponsor must take appropriate measures to ensure that the participants and researchers can be compensated. The sponsor must bear the costs of diagnosis and treatment for the damage or death of the participant related to the clinical trial, as well as the corresponding compensation. Further, the sponsor must provide free trial drugs to participants and pay for medical testing related to clinical trials.

In addition, CHN-37 provides guidance to sponsors on providing compensation to research participants in the event of trial-related injuries or death. The sponsor must explain to participants the compensation and/or treatment available to them in the event of trial-related injuries.

Trial Participation

Per Measures-Ethics, research participants must not be charged research-related fees, and appropriate compensation must be given to the research participants for reasonable expenses incurred in the course of the research process.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

Per the DRR, the management of drugs used in clinical trials must comply with the clinical trial quality management regulations specified in NMPA-GCP-No57-2020. As stated in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the NMPA-No65-2021, the sponsor must establish quality control (QC) and quality assurance (QA) systems for the clinical trial. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) specify that the quality management system for clinical trials should cover the entire process of clinical trials, including the design, implementation, recording, evaluation, result reports, and filing of clinical trials. NMPA-No65-2021 reiterates that sponsors must establish a quality management and pharmacovigilance system for investigational products (IPs). This system must collect safety information, monitor risk, identify and control safety problems in a timely manner, proactively take necessary risk control measures, and evaluate the effectiveness of risk control measures to protect participant safety.

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, quality management includes effective trial plan design, data collection methods and procedures, and information collection necessary for decision-making in clinical trials. The QA and QC methods for clinical trials should be consistent with the inherent risks of clinical trials and the importance of the information collected. Sponsors should ensure the operability of all aspects of clinical trials and avoid over-complication of trial procedures and data collection. The trial protocol, case report form (CRF), and other related documents should be clear, concise, and consistent. During an inspection by the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA), both the research and management teams should send personnel to participate.

The sponsor must conduct quality management based on risk. The key links and data that protect the rights and safety of participants and ensure the reliability of clinical trial results must be clearly defined when the sponsor formulates the trial plan. Risk should be considered from two (2) levels: 1) system level, such as facilities and equipment, standard operating procedures (SOPs), computerized systems, personnel, and suppliers; and 2) clinical trial level, such as trial drugs, trial design, data collection and recording, and the informed consent process. The risk assessment should consider the possibility of errors under existing risk control; the impact of the errors on the protection of participants’ rights and safety; and the extent to which the errors have been monitored. Control measures to reduce risks should be embodied in the design and implementation of the test plan, the monitoring plan, the contract with parties, SOPs, and various trainings. During clinical trials, quality management should be recorded and communicated with relevant parties in a timely manner to promote continuous improvement of risk assessment and quality. The sponsor must regularly evaluate the risk control measures based on new knowledge and experience during the clinical trial period to ensure the effectiveness and applicability of the current quality management. In addition, the sponsor’s quality management system must meet the following requirements:

The sponsor is responsible for formulating, implementing, and updating the SOPs related to clinical trial QA and QC systems
The entire process of clinical trials and laboratory testing must be carried out in strict accordance with the quality management SOPs, and each stage of data processing has QC to ensure that all data are reliable and the data processing process is correct
The sponsor must sign a contract with all relevant parties, including investigators and clinical trial institutions, to clarify the responsibilities of each party
The contract signed by the sponsor and the relevant parties must indicate that the sponsor and the NMPA can access the clinical trial site to consult the source data, source documents, and reports
To standardize the submission of drug clinical trial data, meet the drug registration application data requirements, and improve the efficiency of drug review, the NMPA-No16-2020 provides guidance on the content and format of clinical trial data. The guidance is based on the data submission requirements of international regulatory agencies, including the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC). In addition, the NMPA-No74-2020 has details on the management of records and data that must be provided to the NMPA during clinical trials in China. It indicates that data refers to the information generated during drug development, production, operation, and use, including text, values, symbols, images, audio, pictures, maps, barcodes, etc.

Per the NMPA-No2-2015, for international multicenter clinical trials when the main efficacy and important safety evaluation indicators are laboratory evaluation indicators, it is recommended to establish a central laboratory for unified testing. The laboratory should have the corresponding clinical laboratory qualifications. Where a regional central laboratory is established, the quality control consistency verification between laboratories must be carried out regularly to ensure the consistency and reliability of experimental results.

The NMPA-No48-2018 presents quality management guidelines for Phase III clinical trials using innovative drugs. The guide addresses information the sponsor should provide to the NMPA related to the active pharmaceutical ingredient and its production, considering participants’ safety, drug characteristics, dosage form and route of administration, development stage, target population, and severity of the disease.

Finally, the NMPA has issued the following quality management and technical guidelines for conduct during clinical trials. See each of these documents, for additional details:

NMPA-No29-2024 – guidelines for pharmaceutical research and changes to biological products during clinical trials
Risk-Prcdr – procedures for safety information assessment and risk management during clinical trials
DctrlzCTs-Rare – technical guidelines for decentralized clinical trials using rare disease drugs
GeneCTs-Rare – technical guidelines for clinical trials of gene therapy products for rare diseases
PatientCtr-Risk, PatientCtr-Imp, and PatientCtr-Design – technical guidelines for patient-centered drug clinical trials, including design and risk assessment
NMPA-No15-2023 – technical guidelines for clinical trials of chemical compound drugs
NMPA-No34-2022 – guidelines for protocol changes during drug clinical trials
NMPA-No32-2022 – guidelines for clinical trials of topically administered local effective drugs
NMPA-No31-2022 – guidelines for conduct of research with in vivo gene therapy products
NMPA-No30-2022 – guidelines for conduct of research involving immune cell therapy products
NMPA-No29-2022 – guidelines for conduct of research with in vitro gene modification
NMPA-No27-2022 – guidelines for conduct of research involving specific human immunoglobulins
NMPA-No22-2021 – a research and development model to guide researchers in managing pharmaceutical changes of innovative drugs
NMPA-No17-2022 – guidelines for clinical pharmacological research of biosimiliars
NMPA-No4-2022 – guidelines for research of human bioavailability of bioequivalence of innovative drugs
NMPA-No71-2021 – guidelines for research of drugs for rare diseases
NMPA-No68-2021 – guiding principles for writing the clinical risk management plan
NMPA-No66-2021 – guiding principles for multiplicity issues during drug clinical trials, which refers to multiple testing problems that can lead to errors and inappropriate interpretation of trial results
NMPA-No63-2021 – guidelines for drug clinical trial data management and statistical analysis plan
NMPA-No62-2021 – guidelines for the application of patient-reported outcomes in drug clinical development
NMPA-No59-2021 – guidelines for analyzing the effectiveness of clinical studies of drugs
NMPA-No50-2021 – guidelines for long-term follow-up for clinical research of gene therapy products
NMPA-No6-2021 – guidelines for sponsors in adopting and implementing an adaptive design to improve the success and quality of the research results
Chngs-MktChem – technical guidelines for pharmaceutical change research of listed chemicals
Chngs-MktChemBio – technical guidelines for clinical changes in marketed chemicals and biological products
NMPA-No21-2021 – technical requirements of pharmaceutical research and evaluation of overseas listed and domestic unlisted chemicals
NMPA-No54-2020 – technical guidelines for clinical trials of improved chemical drugs
Chngs-MktBio – technical guidelines for pharmaceutical change research of marketed biological products
Per the VaccineLaw, during the research and development phase for vaccines, the sponsor must establish a biosafety management system that strictly controls biosafety risks, strengthens biosafety management of pathogenic microorganisms (e.g., bacterial strains), protects the health of operators and the public, and safeguards against bacterial toxicity. The use of pathogenic microorganisms, such as strains, is legal and legitimate. The strains and cell strains used during research and development must have clear histories, biological characteristics, and generations. Detailed documentation and archives must be established to ensure that the source is legal, clear, and traceable; if the source is unknown, then it cannot be used.

As delineated in MgmtHumanGen, for international cooperative projects using human genetic resources (HGR), the sponsor must ensure the participation of the Chinese partner. During the study period, the Chinese partner and its researchers must fully participate in the research. All records and data information in the research process, and all backup documentation, must be accessible to the Chinese partner. Both the foreign and Chinese parties have the right to use the information developed with the HGR.

Monitoring Requirements

As per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the purpose of monitoring is to ensure the rights and interests of participants in clinical trials, to ensure that the data in trial records and reports are accurate and complete, and to ensure that trials comply with the agreed protocol and relevant regulations. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 require the sponsor to establish a systematic, prioritized, risk-based method to monitor clinical trials. NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 directs the sponsor to formulate audit procedures and an inspection plan with a special emphasis on protecting the rights and interests of participants, ensuring the authenticity of data, and managing risks in clinical trials. On-site supervision and centralized supervision should be conducted based on the combination of risks of clinical trials. The audit procedures must establish objectives, methods, frequency, and format content of audit reports. All problems observed and discovered by the auditors during the inspection process must be recorded in writing. The sponsor may conduct special inspections in addition to routine inspections. The sponsor selects a person independent of the clinical trial to serve as an inspector. Inspectors must have received corresponding training and inspection experience and be able to effectively perform inspection duties.

As indicated in NMPA-No2-2015, for international multicenter clinical trials, the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) entrusted by the sponsor must conduct supervision of each clinical trial center, the monitoring report must be archived, and the sponsor must periodically review the monitoring work. The sponsor or the CRO must formulate an audit plan and have a unified audit report template and audit result reporting system.

Further, NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 states that researchers and clinical trial institutions must agree to supervision and inspection organized by the sponsor and the NMPA. The sponsor must provide an inspection report or certificate when requested by the NMPA. In accordance with the DRR and CHN-8, NMPA’s Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) will make a risk-based decision on whether to conduct an inspection of a clinical trial, based on the level of drug innovation and the past verification history of the clinical trial site. See NMPA-No56-2023 for NMPA’s management measures that standardize the supervision and inspection of institutions conducting drug clinical trials. In addition, NMPA-No22-2022 indicates that sponsors have the main responsibility for pharmacovigilance inspections during the conduct of a clinical trial. See NMPA-No22-2022 for key considerations during routine and causal inspections, evaluation criteria, risk factors, inspection methods, and other inspection implementation guidance.

The NMPA-No28-2020 further clarifies the link between on-site inspection of drug registration and the pre-market good manufacturing practice (GMP) compliance inspection. Based on the innovation and risk characteristics of an IP, the pre-market GMP compliance inspection will be conducted by the appropriate level regulatory authority (i.e., the CDE, province, autonomous region, or municipality). See the NMPA-No28-2020 for detailed inspection requirements.

Also, see the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 for additional guidance on audits and inspections. See NMPA-No11-2022 for guiding principles on use of risk-based statistical evaluation methods for centralized monitoring of drug clinical trials.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 mandates that researchers, clinical trial institutions, and sponsors abide by the trial protocol, SOPs, and relevant laws and regulations. If non-compliance is found, the sponsor must take immediate measures to correct them and ensure the clinical trials are in compliance. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 state that when an important compliance problem is discovered that may have a significant impact on the safety and rights of participants or the reliability of clinical trial data, the sponsor must conduct a root cause analysis in a timely manner and take appropriate corrective and preventive measures.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 specifies that if the trial protocol is violated or there is a serious quality problem, the sponsor must hold the relevant personnel accountable and send a written report to the NMPA at CHN-58. When it is found that the investigator or clinical trial institution has serious non-compliance problems, the sponsor must terminate the investigator or clinical trial institution from continuing to participate in the clinical trial. The sponsor should also send a written report to the NMPA. At the same time, sponsors and researchers should take corresponding emergency safety measures to protect the safety and rights of participants. A sponsor who terminates or suspends clinical trials early must immediately notify the investigator, clinical trial institutions, and the NMPA, and explain the reasons.

Further, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 states that when a clinical trial is completed or terminated early, the sponsor must submit a clinical trial report to the NMPA. The clinical trial summary report must comprehensively, completely, and accurately reflect the clinical trial results. The safety and effectiveness data of the clinical trial summary report must be consistent with the clinical trial source data. The Measures-Ethics indicates that for research that has been approved for implementation, researchers must promptly submit reports on suspension and termination to the EC.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Electronic Data Processing System

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the sponsor must meet the following requirements in electronic data processing during clinical trials:

Select qualified personnel to supervise data processing, data verification, statistical analysis, and the writing of trial summary reports
Use an electronic data management system that passes reliable system verification and meets the pre-set technical performance to ensure the integrity, accuracy, and reliability of the test data, and to ensure that the system is always valid for verification during the entire test process
Have complete standard operating procedures (SOPs) that cover the setup, installation, and use of electronic data management; the SOPs must describe the verification, functional testing, data collection and processing, system maintenance, system safety, testing, change control, data backup, recovery, and system emergency plans
Ensure the SOPs cover the responsibilities and training of sponsors, researchers, and clinical trial institutions when using computerized systems
Prescribe in advance the method of data modification
Ensure that the data conversion process is consistent with the original data and visibility is maintained during the process
Ensure the security of the electronic data management system, and that unauthorized personnel cannot access it; keep a list of persons authorized to modify data; electronic data is backed up in time; clinical trials designed by blind methods are always blinded, including data entry and processing
In accordance with NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, when the information system of a clinical trial institution has the conditions for establishing a clinical trial electronic medical record, the researcher should use it first, and the corresponding computerized system should have complete authority management and audit trails, which can be traced to the creator or modifier of the record. Researchers must supervise the data collection. They must ensure that all clinical trial data are obtained from clinical trial source documents and trial records, and are accurate, complete, readable, and timely. The source data should be attributable, legible, original, accurate, complete, consistent, and durable. The modification of the source data must be explained and transparent. Relevant medical records should be included in the outpatient or inpatient medical record system. During the processing of clinical trial information, care must be taken to avoid illegal or unauthorized access, disclosure, dissemination, modification, damage, or loss of information. The record, processing, and preservation of clinical trial data must ensure the confidentiality of records and participant information. In the contract with the investigator and the clinical trial institution, the sponsor should clarify the retention time, cost, and handling of the documents.

Per the NMPA-No2-2015, international multicenter clinical trials must adopt a unified data processing center for data query, verification, storage, and analysis.

The NMPA-No74-2020 has additional guidance and requirements for the sponsor’s electronic system.

In addition, as per the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor must ensure that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. Per CHN-37, the sponsor should base their approach to validate such systems on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use and the potential of the system to affect participant protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, the sponsor should maintain SOPs for the systems that cover system setup, installation, and use. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the system users should be provided with training. Refer to CHN-37 for additional information.

Records Management

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37, the sponsor must retain the clinical trial data related to the sponsor and participating parties in the clinical trial. The transfer of data ownership must comply with the requirements of relevant laws and regulations. The sponsor must send written notification to the investigator and clinical trial institution about the requirements for preserving clinical trial records and when the trial-related records are no longer needed. At the beginning of a clinical trial, the investigator, clinical trial institution, and sponsor must establish archive management of the necessary documents. At the end of the clinical trial, an inspector must review and confirm the necessary documents of the investigator, clinical trial institution, and sponsor, and these documents must be properly kept in their respective clinical trial archives. Clinical trial documents must be retained for at least five (5) years after the trial drug is approved for marketing or after the termination of the clinical trial.

In addition, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 emphasizes that clinical trial essential documents are important to the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA)'s inspection of the clinical trial. Sponsors, investigators, and clinical trial institutions must confirm that they have appropriate storage conditions for preserving the essential documents. SOPs for document management should be formulated. The source data or its certified copy must be kept complete and readable during the retention period. In addition, the sponsor must ensure that the investigator can always consult and enter data in the case report form (CRF) reported to the sponsor during the trial. The data should not be controlled by the sponsor alone. The photocopies used as source documents should meet the requirements for certified copies. The NMPA-No37-2020 details the essential documents required for clinical trials to prove compliance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020. The NMPA-No74-2020 contains additional requirements on record management during a clinical trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

Effective May 1, 2025, the Measures for the Administration of Compliance Audits on Personal Information Protection outline the requirements and processes for both self-initiated and regulator-requested compliance audit activities.

Responsible Parties

For requirements on personal data protection, the PIPL delineates that personal information processors are organizations or individuals who independently determine the purpose and method of processing personal information during personal information processing activities.

Data Protection

Per the PIPL, the personal information processor must ensure the safety of the personal information processed, including following principles of openness and transparency, disclosing personal information processing rules, and clearly indicating the purpose, method, and scope of processing. The PIPL applies to the processing of personal information in China for people located within the country. In addition, the PIPL and the DataSec-Regs apply to data processing activities conducted outside of China involving personal information of people located in China under the following circumstances: (1) where the processing is for the purposes of providing products or services to individuals located in China, (2) where the processing is for analyzing and evaluating the behavior of individuals located in China, or (3) other circumstances stipulated by laws and regulations.

Per the PIPL, the processing of personal information should have a clear and reasonable purpose and should be directly related to the purpose of processing with the least impact on personal rights and interests. The personal information processor must follow the principles of lawfulness, fairness, necessity, and good faith when processing personal information, and must not process personal information through misleading, fraudulent, coercive, and other methods. The collection of personal information must be limited to the minimum scope for the purpose of processing, and personal information must not be collected excessively, while following the principles of openness and transparency. The personal information processor must disclose processing rules and clearly indicate the purpose, method, and scope of processing. When handling personal information, the data quality must be guaranteed, and any inaccuracy and incompleteness of personal information must not adversely affect personal rights and interests. For additional data protection details see the DataSec-Regs, which supplements the PIPL.

The PIPL states that for sensitive personal information, which includes medical health information, the personal information processor must adopt additional protective measures, including informing participants of the necessity of processing sensitive personal information and the impact on personal rights and interests. Unless otherwise provided by laws and administrative regulations, the retention period of personal information must be the shortest time necessary to achieve the processing purpose. Also see the Id-SPI for guidance on identifying sensitive personal information.

Further, the DataSec-Regs states that where a network data processor provides or entrusts other network data processors to process personal information and important data, they must agree to the following:

The recipient of network data must fulfill its obligation to protect network data security and process personal information and important data in accordance with the agreed purpose, method, scope, etc.
If two (2) or more network data processors jointly decide on the purpose and method of processing personal information and important data, they must agree upon their respective rights and obligations.
Per the PIPL and the DataSec-Regs, to send personal information outside of China, the personal information processor must meet one (1) of the following conditions (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Pass the security assessment organized by the national cybersecurity and information department (See below in Data Security)
Conduct personal information protection certification by professional institutions in accordance with the requirements of the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC)
Enter into a contract with the overseas recipient in accordance with the standard contract formulated by the CAC stipulating the rights and obligations of both parties
Other conditions stipulated by laws, administrative regulations, or national cyberspace administration departments
Where China’s international treaties and agreements permit providing personal information to foreign recipients
It is necessary to provide personal information overseas to conclude or perform a contract to which the individual is a part
To implement cross-border human resources management in accordance with labor rules and regulations formulated in accordance with the law and collective contracts signed in accordance with the law, and providing employees' personal information overseas is necessary
It is necessary to provide personal information overseas to perform legal duties or obligations
In an emergency, it is necessary to provide personal information overseas in order to protect the life, health, or property safety of a natural person
The PIPL states that the personal information processor must inform the participant of the name of the foreign recipient, contact information, processing purpose, processing method, and types of personal information. In addition, per the PIPL and the DataSec-Regs, the foreign personal information processor must appoint a representative located in China to be responsible for matters related to personal information protection and report the representative’s contact information to the data protection regulators—the CAC.

The DataScrty requires the personal information processor to manage its data processing activities to ensure data security, promote data development and utilization, protect the legitimate rights and interests of individuals and organizations, and safeguard national sovereignty, security, and development interests. CAC-No11-2022 standardizes requirements for exporting “important data” and personal information to protect the rights and interests of personal information, preserve national security and the societal public interest, and promote the cross-border security and free flow of data. Important data is defined as data that, once tampered with, destroyed, leaked, or illegally obtained or used, might endanger national security, economic operations, social stability, public health, or safety in China. Also see the DataSec-Regs for additional requirements on doing risk assessments and handling and reporting on important data. Personal information processors must conduct security assessments of personal data collected and generated in China before exporting it to overseas data processors. Data export security assessments focus on assessing risks that data export activities may bring to national security, the public interest, or the lawful rights and interests of individuals or organizations. The DataTrsfr-Regs delineates exemptions from the requirements to conduct security assessments, for example in an emergency where it is necessary to provide personal information overseas in order to protect the life, health, or property safety of a natural person. If DataTrsfr-Regs conflicts with CAC-No11-2022, the DataTrsfr-Regs supersede.

When applicable, the DataScrty states that the assessment report must be submitted to CAC through the provincial-level department where the personal information processor is located, and include the following materials:

Declaration form
Self-assessment report on data export risks
Data agreements between the data processor and the overseas recipient
The CAC-No11-2022 states that data export activities that have already been conducted before the implementation of CAC-No11-2022 are noncompliant and must be rectified within six (6) months of the effective date of CAC-No11-2022 (i.e., by March 1, 2023). See the CAC-No11-2022 for additional details on conducting the data export security assessment, the provincial inspections, appeal procedures, and CAC’s review actions and timeline.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

Per the PIPL, personal consent must be made voluntarily and with the participants’ full knowledge of the processing purpose, processing methods, and types of personal information processed. In an emergency, if it is not possible to obtain consent in a timely manner to protect the life, health, property, and safety of participants, the personal information processor must promptly notify the individual after the emergency is eliminated. (Note: consent to data processing is not the same as informed consent to the research described in the Informed Consent topic.) As indicated in the DataSec-Regs, individual consent is defined as specific and unambiguous consent given by an individual for specific processing of their personal information.

The DataSec-Regs supplements the PIPL, adding detailed protection requirements when personal information processing is based on individual consent:

The collection of personal information must not be collected beyond the scope, and personal consent must not be obtained through misleading information, fraud, coercion, etc.
When processing sensitive personal information such as biometrics, religious beliefs, specific identities, and medical health the individual's separate consent must be obtained
When processing the personal information of a minor under the age of 14, the consent of the minor’s parent/legal guardian must be obtained
Personal information must not be processed beyond the purpose, method, type, or retention period of the personal information that the individual has consented to
Processors must not frequently seek consent after an individual has clearly expressed their disagreement with the processing of their personal information
If the purpose, method, or type of personal information processing changes, the individual’s consent must be obtained again
If laws and administrative regulations provide that written consent must be obtained for the processing of sensitive personal information, such provisions must apply
Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Obtaining Consent

In all Chinese clinical trials, a freely given informed consent is required to be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, the RegEthics, and the EC-Guide. In addition, China is implementing the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) as a guidance document. As per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the DAL, the EC-Guide, and CHN-37, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by an ethics committee (EC) and provided to the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) with the clinical trial application. Per the MgmtHumanGen, the ICF must also be provided to the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) (now National Health Commission (NHC)) as part of its application procedures for human genetic resource (HGR) licenses. In addition, per the VaccineLaw, in carrying out a vaccine clinical trial, the investigator is required to obtain a signed ICF from the participant or legal representative/guardian. (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from MOST to NHC, effective May 1, 2024).

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, and CHN-37 state that the investigator, or a person designated by the investigator, must provide detailed research study information to the participant or the legal representative/guardian. As delineated in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, and the EC-Guide, the ICF content should be briefly and clearly presented orally or, in a written language, that is easy to understand, and commensurate with the comprehension level of the research participants. The participant and the legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate. The Measures-Ethics indicates that ICFs must contain sufficient, complete, and accurate information, and be expressed in language, text, video images, and so forth that research participants can understand. Researchers must explain each item to the research participants in accordance with the content of the ICF.

As per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, CHN-37, and the EC-Guide, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or the legal representative/guardian to waive or appear to waive their legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representatives from their liabilities for any negligence. The investigator should give the participant sufficient time to understand the ICF content, and the participant should make a decision whether or not to agree to participate in the study and sign the form. In psychological research, because informed consent may affect the participant’s response to the question, thereby affecting the accuracy of the research results, the investigator can fully inform the participant and obtain informed consent following the project study’s completion.

Per DctrlzCTs-Rare, for decentralized clinical trials of rare diseases, electronic informed consent may be used. When electronic informed consent is used, the informed consent process needs to be recorded, archived, and traceable. For rare disease participants with limited mobility, researchers can use remote informed consent to more quickly and easily obtain consent and ensure that all participants have the latest version in a timely manner. To use electronic informed consent in these scenarios, researchers must conduct evaluation and verification in advance and provide the participants with instructions and training. Before adopting electronic informed consent, the participants should be fully informed of the scope of data collection, access rights, etc. generated during the electronic informed consent process. During the informed consent process, researchers should ensure data security and the privacy of the participants (including their legal representative/guardian) are protected.

Per the MgmtHumanGen, to collect Chinese HGR for a clinical trial, the participant must agree to participate in the clinical trial in writing. Information provided to the participant must be comprehensive, complete, true, accurate, and must not conceal information nor be misleading or deceiving.

For specific consent requirements for human genome editing research, see the Consent for Specimen section.

Re-Consent

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 require investigators to use the latest version of the ICF approved by the EC and, if necessary, participants in the clinical trial process should sign an updated ICF again. If new information may affect the participant’s continued participation in the trial, the investigator must promptly notify the participant and the legal representative/guardian and make corresponding records. Per the RegEthics and the Measures-Ethics, the investigator should obtain re-consent under the following circumstances (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The research plan, scope, and content have changed
Research using previously collected samples that were used for diagnosis and treatment and were labeled with personal identifiable labels
Research using human biological samples or related clinical disease history data with subject-identifiable labels from existing biological sample repositories/databases
The risks related to the research are increased or substantially increased
The level of civil capacity of research participants has been raised
Other changes occur during the research
Language Requirements

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, the RegEthics, and the EC-Guide require the ICF to be presented in oral or written form in a language that the participant is able to understand.

Documenting Consent

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, CHN-37, and the EC-Guide, the participant and the legal representative/guardian, and researchers who perform informed consent, should sign and date the ICF. Per the Measures-Ethics, when the research participants do not have the ability to express their consent in writing, the researcher must obtain their oral informed consent and have audio and video recordings and other process records and supporting materials.

Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, CHN-37, and the EC-Guide, if the ICF is not signed by the participant, the relationship should be marked on the form. If the participant and the legal representative/guardian lack the ability to read, an impartial witness must witness the entire informed consent process. The witness should sign and date the ICF after the following steps have occurred:

The written ICF and any other written information to be provided to the participant is read and explained to the participant and the legal representative/guardian
The participant and the legal representative/guardian, have orally consented to the participant’s involvement in the trial, and has signed and dated the ICF, if capable of doing so
Before participating in the study, the participant or the legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF.

Waiver of Consent

The EC-Guide and the RegEthics state that the EC may grant a waiver of informed consent when the following conditions are met (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The risk that the subject may suffer does not exceed the minimum.
The exemption from obtaining the informed consent of the subject does not have a negative impact on the participant’s rights and interests.
The use of human bodily materials or data that can identify the information for research has made it impossible to find the participant, and the research project does not involve personal privacy and commercial interests.
The biological sample donor has signed an ICF agreeing that the donated sample and related information can be used for all medical research.
The exemption requires informed consent and does not mean that it is exempt from the review of the EC.
Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Based on the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, the RegEthics, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study purpose, procedures, and duration of the trial
Any expected risks or discomforts to the participant
Any expected benefits to the participant; if no benefit is expected, the participant should be informed of this point
The participant’s responsibilities
The approximate number of participants involved in the trial
Those aspects of the trial that are experimental
Treatment available to the participant as well as important potential risks and benefits associated with this treatment
The alternative procedure(s) or course(s) of treatment that may be available to the participant, and their important potential benefits and risks
The nature, form, and extent of compensation for participation
Any expenses the participant needs to pay to participate in the trial
The extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained, and a statement that, when necessary, the sponsor, the ethics committee (EC), the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA), and drug authorities in the provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities may be required to review participant data
The scope and method of use of research data and research participants' personal data, and whether sharing and secondary use are carried out
Any treatment and corresponding compensation the participant can expect to receive in the event of a trial-related injury
The participant’s rights, including that participation is voluntary, and that the participant can withdraw from the study at any time without penalty or loss of benefits, including medical treatment, to which the participant is otherwise entitled
Precautions and protective measures for the participant before, during, and after the research
The foreseeable circumstances and/or reasons under which the participant's participation in the trial may be terminated
Contact information for the sponsor and investigator in the event of participant problems or injuries related to the trial
Basic information about the researcher and qualification of research institution
That records identifying the participant will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and/or regulations, will not be made publicly available. If the results of the trial are published, the participant’s identity will remain confidential
Whether the results of the study will be provided to the research participants
That the participant or the legally acceptable representative will be informed in a timely manner if information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial
When appropriate, the EC may require the following additional information: whether the research may put the participant at risk but the risk is not currently foreseeable; researchers can terminate a participant’s participation in the study without their consent; new major discoveries during the research will be provided to the participant; and whether there is a potential conflict of interest
If applicable, how biological samples will be handled
Per the MgmtHumanGen, to collect Chinese human genetic resources (HGR) for a clinical trial, the investigator must provide advance information to the participant on the purpose of collection, the possible health impact, the protection measures of personal privacy, their participation is voluntary, and they have the right to withdraw unconditionally at any time.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Overview

In accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (CHN-84), principles set forth in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), China’s ethics standards safeguard the rights of research participants. Participants also have the right to receive the nationally available standard of health care, and the right to report any trial-related injuries or issues to the investigator(s) and the ethics committee (EC). The RegEthics states that the EC must protect the legitimate rights and interests of the participants, safeguarding their dignity, and promoting the development of biomedical research norms. As indicated in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the EC-Guide, and the RegEthics, a participant’s rights must be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process. (See the Required Elements; Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.) See CHN-26 for an analysis of clinical trial participants’ rights in China.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, the RegEthics, and CHN-37, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As delineated in the Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the RegEthics, and CHN-37, a potential research participant or the legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per the Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, the RegEthics, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, and CHN-37, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 also states that it is the responsibility of the investigator(s) to safeguard the confidentiality of research data to protect the identity and records of research participants.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The Measures-Ethics, the EC-Guide, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, and CHN-37 state that the research participant or the legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the investigator(s) and the EC to address trial-related inquiries and/or to appeal against a violation of the participant’s rights. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 state that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
The EC-Guide states that during an emergency, clinical studies on human participants must not be conducted without prior review and approval by the ethics committee (EC). Per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), in an emergency, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) has not been obtained from the research participant or the legal representative/guardian, or if an effective treatment is lacking, but the investigational product could save the participant’s life, recover health, or alleviate pain, the clinical trial may be conducted. However, the method used on the participant must be explained clearly in the trial protocol as well as the relevant trial documentation, and the EC must approve the protocol in advance. The participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible, and consent to continue and other consent should be requested, as appropriate.

During an outbreak of an epidemic, the EC-Guide advises ECs to adhere to the highest scientific and ethical standards for independent review of the research project to ensure balancing of quality and timeliness. The materials provided by the researcher can be simplified according to the situation. The EC should pay special attention to the informed consent process as participants may be improperly exploited due to their obvious vulnerability, especially when it involves high-risk and risk-uncertain research. It should be ensured that participants choose to participate voluntarily and independently after being fully informed and fully understanding the possible risks of research. Research participants or the legal representative/guardian must be allowed to withdraw from research unconditionally at any stage.

See the EC-Guide for additional guidance on the EC review when there is a major epidemic risk.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Overview

As per the EC-Guide, the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), in all Chinese clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. The EC-Guide and the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 define vulnerable persons as those who are relatively (or absolutely) incapable of safeguarding their interests, and consequently, are usually incapable of giving consent or refusing to give consent due to the restriction on their capacities or freedoms. These populations include people with low socioeconomic status and low education levels. The EC-Guide also defines vulnerability to include the following areas: economic, institutional fragility, cognitive, social, medical treatment, and compliance. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 also include members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable subjects include persons in nursing homes, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, which upholds the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki (CHN-84) and the RegEthics, both require special attention to be provided to those participants who cannot give or refuse to give consent for themselves, and for those who will not benefit personally from the research. As per RegEthics, this population includes children, pregnant women, mentally impaired persons, and people with mental disorders. Also, the Measures-Ethics requires special protection for research participants involving specific groups, such as children, pregnant women, the elderly, persons with intellectual and mental disabilities. In addition, special attention should be paid to studies involving fertilized eggs, embryos, fetuses, or those that may be affected by assisted reproductive technologies.

Note: The EC-Guide clarifies that special protections for vulnerable populations must not mean that they are excluded during the recruitment process. Vulnerable people should also benefit from research and be encouraged to participate in clinical research.

For additional information, see the Children/Minors and Mentally Impaired sections. In addition, see CHN-26 for an analysis of clinical trial participants’ rights in China.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
As per MPL, minors refer to citizens who are under the age of 18.

In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), when the research participant is a child, the informed consent form (ICF) must be signed by the child’s parent/legal guardian. If the child can decide whether to participate, the ICF should also be approved by the child. The age of consent for children and minors is not defined in the currently available regulatory resources. See CHN-26 for an analysis of clinical trial participants’ rights in China.

Per NMPA-No11-2017, clinical trials may be conducted on children depending on existing knowledge of and extrapolation by research results in adults. Drugs that are intended for use in children should be evaluated in the appropriate age group for children and start in the high-age group followed by the low-age group. The EC-Guide stipulates the following conditions when children can participate in research:

Only when it is shown that the research may be aimed at the prevention and mitigation of serious problems that affect the health and well-being of children
Research that does not exceed the minimum risk
Research that moderately exceeds the minimum risk, but is expected to directly benefit the child participants
Research that moderately exceeds the minimum risk limit, but children may benefit from a population of participants
Per DctrlzCTs-Rare, for decentralized clinical trials of rare diseases, electronic informed consent may be used with children. Since rare diseases often occur in childhood, the use of multimedia interactive modes, such as video, audio, and charts, in the informed consent process will be more conducive to the understanding of child participants and help them to be fully informed.

Assent Requirements

No information is currently available regarding assent requirements for children or minors.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
While RegEthics lists pregnant women as a vulnerable population, there are no relevant provisions regarding any special consent procedures for pregnant women, fetuses, or neonates.

Per NMPA-No11-2017, any research studies of pregnant women should include a follow-up evaluation of these participants during pregnancy, as well as the fetuses and the children from that pregnancy. If a research study is intended for lactating women, the researchers should test the secretion of the drug or its metabolites in human milk, if feasible. If lactating women are recruited into a clinical trial, the effects of the drug on their infants should be monitored and, if necessary, followed. Pregnant women should be excluded from any research study if the investigational product is not intended for use during pregnancy. In this case, if a pregnancy occurs during the clinical trial, the study should be terminated and reported to the ethics committee for follow-up and evaluation of the pregnancy, fetus, and child.

In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), informed consent requirements for conducting clinical trials with pregnant or nursing women or fetuses follow the general requirements listed in the Required Elements section. Specifically, the informed consent form should include a statement on the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) list prisoners as a vulnerable population. Per CHN-37, because incarceration could affect their ability to make a voluntary decision regarding participation in research. A research study involving prisoners should ensure that these prospective participants are informed and are given the opportunity to make their own decisions without any interference from a higher authority. The ethics committee must also ensure that the study will be independently monitored to assure the dignity and rights of the prisoners involved in the research. In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37, informed consent requirements for conducting clinical trials with prisoners should follow the general requirements listed in the Required Elements section.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
While the RegEthics lists mentally impaired people as a vulnerable population, there are no relevant provisions regarding any special consent procedures for them. The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) allow the ethics committee to approve the participation of research participants who are incompetent, or mentally or physically incapable of giving consent under certain conditions. The informed consent form must be signed and dated by the participant’s legal representative/guardian.

Per DctrlzCTs-Rare, for decentralized clinical trials of rare diseases, electronic informed consent may be used with mentally impaired people. For some rare disease patients with cognitive impairment (such as neurodevelopmental dyslexia) or writing disorders (such as primary hereditary dystonia), the legal representative/guardian can help introduce the material to better protect the rights and interests of participants.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
As delineated in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, investigational products (IPs) are defined as experimental and reference drugs used in a clinical trial.

The International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) define an IP as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes a product with a marketing authorization when it is used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form, when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Manufacturing

According to the DAL and the NMPA-No28-2020, the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) in China. See CHN-11 for an analysis of the authorization procedure for manufacturing drugs in China.

Per the DAL and the NMPA-No28-2020, the holder of the drug registration certificate must obtain a drug production license (found at NMPA-No72-2019) to produce a drug or entrust a pharmaceutical production enterprise to produce it. If an entrusted production enterprise is used, the drug registration certificate holder and the entrusted production enterprise must sign an entrustment agreement and a quality agreement. Blood products, narcotic drugs, psychotropic drugs, medical toxic drugs, and pharmaceutical precursor chemicals cannot be entrusted to a pharmaceutical production enterprise for production, unless otherwise stipulated by the NMPA. The DAL states that the drug production license must indicate the validity period and production scope, and must be reviewed and reissued upon expiration. Per the NMPA-No28-2020, a drug production license is valid for five (5) years; an application for a new drug production license must be submitted to the original issuing authority six (6) months before the expiration.

As delineated in the DAL and the NMPA-No28-2020, the following conditions must be met for drug manufacturing:

Pharmacy technicians, engineering, technical personnel, and skilled workers have been qualified according to law
Sanitary plants and facilities are compatible with the production of pharmaceuticals
Institutions, personnel, and equipment are capable of quality management and inspection of the produced drugs
Rules and regulations are in place to ensure the quality of pharmaceuticals and compliance with quality management requirements
Specific guidance on drugs manufactured for clinical trials is provided in NMPA-No43-2022 (an annex to the NMPA-GMP), which states that the preparation and quality control of drugs for clinical trials must follow the requirements in the NMPA-GMP; minimize the risks of contamination, cross-contamination, confusion, and errors in the manufacturing process; and ensure the quality of clinical trial IPs to protect the safety of clinical trial participants. See NMPA-No43-2022 for detailed manufacturing requirements, including the quality management system, personnel, facilities and equipment, material management, file management, and management of the control drug.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 specifies that the manufacture of clinical trial drugs must meet the relevant requirements for quality management. See NMPA-GMP, NMPA-No43-2022, NMPA-No28-2020, NMPA-No13-2015, and NMPA-No28-2016 for guidance on the quality management system during manufacturing. Per the DRR and the NMPA-No28-2020, the Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) makes a risk-based decision on whether to initiate an on-site inspection of drug production based on the registered varieties, processes, facilities, and previous acceptance verification. However, on-site inspections must be conducted for innovative drugs, improved new drugs, and biological products.

The International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) also requires IPs to be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable good manufacturing practices and used in accordance with the approved protocol.

Import

The DAL provides that prior to IP import, an NMPA import drug license must be obtained for each IP. Per CHN-18, before each import, the import agent must file for a record with the local agency at the port of entry, which issues a customs clearance notice of imported drugs and port inspection notice of imported drugs. According to CHN-28, importers must apply for the drug import license via the China International Trade Single Window online platform (CHN-2). For IP shipments, only a party authorized under the corresponding clinical trial approval can register and apply for the drug import license.

Per NMPA-No75-2020, there is a one-time fee of 2,000 Yuan for the import of drugs.

Pursuant to the NMPA-No35-2017, researchers can conduct Phase I of multi-regional clinical trials (MRCT) of imported IPs and therapeutic biological products (excluding vaccines) simultaneously in China.

As per NMPA-No52-2018, clinical trial and drug registration applications for imported new drugs or therapeutic biological products using trial data generated entirely overseas do not need to be registered first in their own country in order to enter China. This removes the need to conduct local clinical trials in addition to existing overseas research. Overseas clinical trial data may be acceptable for direct China registration provided that:

The data is reliable, authenticated, and complies with CHN-37
The data can assess the efficacy and safety for the target indication
There are no ethnic sensitivities to Chinese local populations influencing efficacy and safety
The data meets China drug registration requirements
See the NMPA-No52-2018 for additional details on the review and approval of overseas clinical trial data. For more information on application requirements, see the Submission Process and Submission Content sections.

Per NMPA-No230-2015 and CHN-18, the NMPA will prioritize the review and approval of foreign innovative drugs manufactured in China and drugs manufactured at a United States (U.S.) or European Union facility, and are simultaneously under review for marketing authorization by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or the European Medicines Agency.

Please note: China is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (CHN-30), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see CHN-55.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Investigator’s Brochure

In accordance with the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37), the sponsor is responsible for providing the investigators with an Investigator’s Brochure (IB). The IB must contain all of the relevant information on the investigational product(s) (IPs) including chemical, pharmaceutical, toxicological, pharmacological, and clinical information and data on the IP, including trials already completed or being conducted in other places.

As specified in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37, the IB must provide coverage of the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation parameters
Pharmaceutical aspects
Pharmacokinetics and metabolism
Toxicological effects in any animal species tested under a single dose study, a repeated dose study, or a special study
Results of clinical pharmacokinetic studies
Information regarding safety, pharmacodynamics, efficacy, and dose responses obtained from prior clinical trials in humans
See the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 for detailed IB content guidelines.

Quality Management

Per the DAL, drug manufacturers are required to abide by quality management regulations, establish and improve the quality management system for drug production, and ensure that the entire process meets statutory requirements, including good manufacturing practice (GMP) standards in the NMPA-GMP and NMPA-No43-2022 (an annex to the NMPA-GMP). With respect to the manufacture of the clinical trial IP, NMPA-No43-2022 states that the manufacturing facility must establish a quality management system based on risks and a document system to ensure the effective operation of the quality management system. The sponsor must audit and confirm the quality management system of the entrusted manufacturing facility and sign an entrustment agreement and a quality agreement to clearly define the responsibilities of all parties to ensure that the clinical trial drug meets the intended use and quality requirements. Changes that may affect the safety of clinical trial drugs, such as changes in the preparation site, prescription process, batch size, quality standards, key raw and auxiliary materials, packaging materials of clinical trial drugs, and technology transfer, must be evaluated. Changes and assessments should be documented. Deviations from the preparation process, quality standards, and other deviations that may affect the quality of drugs for clinical trials should be investigated and evaluated, and corresponding records should be kept.

Per the DRR, when reviewing the application, the CDE will conduct an associated review of the chemical raw materials, auxiliary materials, and packaging materials and containers used in direct contact with the pharmaceutical preparations. The CDE makes a risk-based decision on whether to initiate an on-site inspection based on the registered varieties, processes, facilities, and previous acceptance verification. For innovative drugs, improved new drugs, and biological products, on-site verification of drug registration manufacturing and inspection of pre-market drug manufacturing quality management must be conducted. If manufacturing verification is required, the applicant and the drug regulatory department of the province, autonomous region, or municipality directly under the Central Government where the applicant or manufacturer is located will be informed. The National Institutes for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC) (also referred to as the Procuratorate), or the drug inspection agency designated by the NMPA, will conduct the inspections and testing, as needed. The drug registration inspection of overseas-produced drugs must be implemented by the port drug inspection agency.

Per CHN-37, the sponsor must maintain a Certificate of Analysis to document the identity, purity, and strength of the IP(s) to be used in the clinical trial.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Investigational product (IP) labeling in China must comply with the requirements set forth in the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the ProvLabel, the DAL, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37). The name, insert sheet, and label of any drug for which registration is applied must comply with the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA)’s requirements as mandated in the preceding regulations.

As per the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the sponsor is responsible for ensuring the proper packaging and labeling of the IPs. The IPs, comparator, and placebo products must be labeled in conformity with the clinical protocol, and be easily recognizable, correctly coded, and marked with special labels indicating that the product is to be used for clinical trial purposes. For international multicenter clinical trials, NMPA-No2-2015 states that the label content of drugs should be complete and meet the requirements of the country or region where they are located to ensure the identification, traceability, and correct use of drugs. The label content should include clinical trial information and clinical trial drug information, as detailed below.

Per NMPA-No43-2022 (an annex to the NMPA-GMP), to ensure the accuracy of IP labeling for clinical trials, operating procedures should be established that include measures to prevent mislabeling, such as balance calculation of label quantity, site clearance, and intermediate control inspection by trained personnel. Where blinded trials are involved, effective measures should also be taken to prevent labeling errors between the test drug and the reference drug (including placebo). For operations that need to remove the original product labels and packaging, corresponding measures should be taken to prevent contamination, cross-contamination, confusion, and errors between the test drug and the reference drug (including placebo). IP labels for clinical trial use must be clear and easy to identify, and contain the following contents:

The sponsor of the clinical trial
The name of the drug used in the clinical trial
The batch number and/or serial number of the product and the packaging operation (the label information of the clinical trial IP used for the blinded test should be able to remain blinded)
The clinical trial number or other unique code corresponding to the clinical trial
The words "only for clinical trials" or similar instructions
Validity period, expressed in a way such as XXXX (year)/XX (month)/XX (day) or XXXX (year)/XX (month) that can clearly indicate the year, month, and day
Specifications and instructions for use (the instructions for use or other written instructions provided to the participants may be attached, and the content should meet the requirements of the clinical trial protocol)
Packaging specifications
Storage conditions
If the clinical trial drug is allowed to be taken home by the subjects, it must be specially marked to avoid misuse
NMPA-No43-2022 states that the inner and outer packaging must contain all of the label contents. If the size of the inner package label is too small to indicate all of the above contents, at least the first four (4) label contents in the bulleted list above must be included. If the validity period needs to be changed, the IP must be affixed with an additional label, and the additional label must be marked with the new validity period. The original batch number or drug code must not be overwritten when affixing additional labels. After the applicant's evaluation, the additional label operation of changing the validity period can be carried out in the institution conducting the clinical trial. The operation of affixing additional labels must be carried out in accordance with the operating procedures approved by the sponsor. Personnel must be trained and approved in these operating procedures, and the operation site must be reviewed and confirmed by personnel. Attachment of additional labels should be properly documented and traceable in clinical trial-related documents or batch records. The sponsor must conduct a quality review of the IPs with additional labels.

The ProvLabel and the DAL also provide labeling information that should be included on the outer packaging and immediate container of all drugs to be registered in China. (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements.)

Adopted name in China
Instructions
Generic name
License holder and their address
Indications or functions
Strength, dosage, and usage
Production date and batch number
Expiration (Should be marked as one (1) day or one (1) month earlier than the actual expiration date, depending on whether the date is labeled to a specific day or month)
Manufacturer and their address
Ingredients
Adverse reactions
Contraindications and precautions
Storage information
Approval number
Labels and instructions for narcotic, psychotropic, medical toxic, radioactive, external, and non-prescription drugs must be printed with the prescribed marks
The label language must also be scientific, standardized, and accurate, and written in standard Chinese characters published by the National Language Commission. See ProvLabel and the DAL for detailed labeling instructions.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 state that the IP must be coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable.

(See Product Management section for additional information on IP labeling requirements).

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

Per NMPA-No43-2022, operating procedures should be established to ensure the accuracy of packaging investigational products (IPs) for clinical trials. The packaging of IPs for clinical trials should prevent and avoid its deterioration, contamination, damage, and errors during storage and transportation. The procedures should identify activities that open or change the packaging. The test drug and the reference drug are usually not allowed to be packaged in the same packaging line at the same time. For clinical trial IPs that need to be packaged simultaneously on the same packaging line, appropriate operating procedures and equipment should be in place, and relevant operators should be trained to avoid confusion and errors.

Further, NMPA-No43-2022 states that before approving the release of an IP for a clinical trial, the person responsible must evaluate the quality of each batch of IPs to ensure that they comply with laws, regulations, and technical requirements, including:

Batch records
Deviations and changes, subsequent investigations, and assessments
Correct packaging and labels
Production conditions
Status of facilities, equipment, preparation process, and inspection method
The release of raw and auxiliary materials and the inspection results of intermediate and finished products
The relevant test results of the reference drug (including placebo) (if applicable)
Stability study data and trends (if applicable)
Storage conditions
Qualification certificate of reference substance/standard product (if applicable)
Audit report of the quality management system of the entrusted unit (if applicable)
Proof of legal origin of the reference drug (if applicable)
Other requirements related to the quality of the batch of clinical trial drugs
As per NMPA-No43-2022, the delivery of IPs must be carried out according to the sponsor’s delivery instructions and specific requirements. The sponsor must select an appropriate transportation method according to the packaging, quality attributes, and storage requirements of the IP, take corresponding measures to prevent deterioration, damage, pollution, temperature control failure, etc., and confirm the IP is sent to designated clinical trial institutions. The IPs delivered to the clinical trial institutions must at least be accompanied by a certificate of conformity, a delivery list, and a receipt confirmation from the research institution. IPs must not be directly transferred from a clinical trial institution to another clinical trial institution. If necessary, the sponsor and the clinical trial institutions of both parties should have complete quality assessment and operating procedures for the transfer of IPs, which can only be implemented after full assessment and approval by the sponsor.

The NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 states that the sponsor must provide the IPs to investigators and clinical trial institutions. The sponsor must not provide the IPs until the clinical trial has obtained the approval of the ethics committee and the approval or filing of the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA). The sponsor must provide the investigator and the clinical trial institution with a written description of the IP, including directions for use and storage. Further, the sponsor must formulate procedures for the supply and management, including reception, storage, distribution, use, and recovery. The sponsor must ensure that the IPs are delivered to researchers and clinical trial institutions in a timely manner. The sponsor must also take measures to ensure the stability of the trial drug during the trial period. Investigators and clinical trial institutions are responsible for the management of IPs provided by the sponsor. They must assign qualified pharmacists or other personnel to manage IPs.

CHN-37 provides additional guidance that the sponsor must ensure:

IP product quality
IP manufactured according to good manufacturing practice (GMP), as per NMPA-GMP and NMPA-No43-2022
Proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP in accordance with the protocol, and special marking to indicate that the drug is specifically to be used in a clinical trial
IP use record which includes information on the quantity, loading, shipment, receipt, dispensing and handling, and the reclamation and destruction of the unused drug
Establishment of IP management and filing systems
Acceptable storage temperatures, conditions, and times for the IP
Timely delivery of the IP
Refer to the NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 and CHN-37 for detailed sponsor-related IP requirements.

Per the DAL, the sponsor—also referred to as the holder of a drug registration certificate—must establish a drug release procedure that includes reviewing the drug to ensure compliance with national drug standards, and releasing it only after the quality attorney signs it. Further, drug license holders, pharmaceutical production enterprises, and medical institutions must establish and implement a drug traceability system, in accordance with regulations.

Record Requirements

Per NMPA-No43-2022 (an appendix to NMPA-GMP), sponsors should set up investigational drug files, which are documents and records of the preparation, packaging, quality inspection, the release of products in batches, delivery, and transportation. These files should be retained until at least two (2) years after the IP is withdrawn from the market, or at least two (2) years after the termination of the clinical trial or the registration application if the IP fails to get marketing authorization. The files should at least contain the known or potential key quality attributes and key process parameters in the research stage, re-evaluated with the development of the product, and updated when necessary. The files can be the original documents or certified copies.

Per NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, the sponsor must keep records of the transportation, receipt, distribution, recovery, and destruction of the IPs; establish a recycling management system to ensure the recall of defective products and recovery after the clinical trial and expiration; and establish a disposal system. The entire management process of all IPs must be documented. Finally, the retained samples must be kept until the end of the clinical trial or the time limit required by relevant laws and regulations, whichever time period is longer. If the two (2) are inconsistent, the longer period must be used. The sponsor must keep clinical trial records for at least five (5) years after the IP is approved for marketing.

In addition, as indicated in NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, there must be clear documentation of the IP’s quality evaluation, such as approval for release, non-release or other decisions, and must be signed by the person responsible for release. Before the IP is shipped to the clinical trial institution, the sponsor must confirm the following contents and keep relevant records:

The IP has been approved for release
The relevant requirements necessary for the initiation of clinical trials have been met, such as the approval or consent of the ethics committee and the NMPA
Inspection and confirmation of transportation conditions
Per NMPA-GCP-No57-2020, complete written records should be kept for the delivery of IPs, which usually include the name or code of the IP, dosage form, strength, batch number or drug code, quantity, expiration date, applicant, preparation unit, packaging form, and storage requirements. Records should also be kept of the receiving unit and address, contact information, shipping date, transportation method, and the temperature monitoring measures. If the transportation is entrusted to a third-party carrier, the relevant information of the carrier shall also be included. The content of the shipping record can be adjusted as needed for blinding.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

The term “specimen” is not referenced within China. However, as per MgmtHumanGen and the HGR-AppGuide, human genetic resources (HGR) are defined as including both human genetic resource materials and human genetic resource information. HGR materials refer to genetic materials, such as organs, tissues, and cells, which contain the human genome, genes, and their products. The HGR-AppGuide further elaborates that HGR includes all types of cells, whole blood, tissues/tissue sections, semen, cerebrospinal fluid, pleural/peritoneal effusions, blood/bone marrow smears, hair (with hair follicles), etc., but do not include other human secretions, body fluids, swabs, etc. that do not contain cells. HGR information refers to data and other information materials generated using HGR materials, including nucleic acid sequence information such as human genes, genomes, transcriptomes, and epigenomes, as well as information materials such as diseases associated with them, but does not include simple clinical data, imaging data, protein data, and metabolic data.

The Measures-Ethics defines "human or human biological samples" as the human body itself, including human cells, tissues, organs, body fluids, flora, etc., as well as fertilized eggs, embryos, and fetuses.

The Rules-MgmtHGR clarifies that HGR information includes information materials such as human genes and genome data generated using HGR materials. It does not include clinical data, imaging data, protein data, and metabolic data.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Import

Per the QuarantineLaw, the AQSIQ-No160, and CHN-54, imports of human tissue, biological products, blood, and hemoproducts are subject to health and quarantine inspection. The importer is required to declare the items for inspection with local offices governed by the General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine (AQSIQ). As described in CHN-46, AQSIQ operates 35 Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureaus (CIQ) in China’s 31 provinces.

Per the AQSIQ-No160, the management of special articles is subject to risk control, which includes quarantine approval, inspection, and supervision as per risk levels upon assessment. Importers of special articles must apply for the quarantine approval by submitting the following documents to the local CIQ:

A completed Application for Quarantine of Inbound/Outbound Special Articles (CHN-54)
Specific descriptions of the special articles, including Chinese and English names, classification, composition, origin, purpose, import destination, etc.
Approval documents from health authorities for inbound human blood, plasma, tissue, organs, cells, bone marrow, etc.
For first-time importers, provide copies of the business license and the organization code certificate (copied)
For first-time importers, firm information including management system certification status, address, place of production, laboratory setup, storage facilities, processing conditions, production processes, floor plan, etc.
For first-time importers, biosafety documents including storage management rules, use management rules, waste disposal rules, professional management rules, emergency handling procedures, etc.
In addition, see QuarantineRules for more details on the procedures for the inspection and quarantine processes, the jurisdiction of AQSIQ and its local branches, and different levels of sample testing based on risk and the importer’s track record.

Export

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024. The SC-Order777 amends the MgmtHumanGen to reflect the transfer of HGR management from MOST to the NHC, but the Bioscrty-Law has not yet been amended to reflect the transfer).

The MgmtHumanGen and the Bioscrty-Law prohibit foreign entities or individuals from collecting or preserving China’s HGR in China, or providing Chinese HGR for use abroad except under prescribed conditions to carry out scientific research activities, which must be conducted through collaboration with Chinese scientific research institutions, higher education institutions, medical institutions, or enterprises. Per the MgmtHumanGen, the foreign entity and the Chinese entity must jointly file an application for approval to MOST (now the NHC), and the research must pass an ethics review in the countries (regions) where the partners are located. The only exception to the approval requirement is international collaborations in clinical trials that do not involve the export of Chinese HGR materials such as organs, tissues, or cells comprising the human genome, genes, and their products. Such clinical trial collaborations, however, must be filed with MOST (now the NHC) on its online platform (CHN-6), which will generate a record number. See HGR-WorkUpdt for information on CHN-6. Per HGR-InfoSys, for help with CHN-6, contact Zhu Min, NHC’s China Biotechnology Development Center, at 010-88225151 or 010-88225168; or the information system support at 17610386080.

As delineated in MgmtHumanGen, the applicant may apply for the export license separately, or with the application for international cooperative research. (See Regulatory Authority and Clinical Trial Lifecycle topics for details on MOST’s (now the NHC’s) review and approval requirements for HGR collection and international cooperative research license applications.) To apply for an export license, follow the instructions at NHC’s online platform (CHN-6).

Material Transfer Agreement

Per the Measures-Ethics, where establishments cooperate with enterprises and other institutions to carry out life science and medical research involving humans, or provide human biological samples and information data for enterprises and other institutions carrying out life science and medical research involving humans, the institutions must fully understand the overall situation of the research, clarify the scope of use and handling methods of biological samples and information data through agreements subject to ethics review and follow-up review, and supervise their proper disposal after the research is completed.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 20, 2024
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

The National Health Commission (NHC) has added a human genetic resources management page to its website which provides service guides, answers to frequently asked questions, and other resources to support practitioners.

Per the NHC-HGRmgt, National Health Commission (NHC) is responsible for China’s management of human genetic resources (HGR). (Note that per SC-Order777 and NHC-HGRmgt, management of HGR was transferred from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) to NHC, effective May 1, 2024).

As delineated in the MgmtHumanGen and the Rules-MgmtHGR, MOST (now the NHC), through its experts, is responsible for reviewing and approving license applications to collect HGR and conduct international collaborative projects using Chinese HGR. The applicant’s submission for these licenses must include the written informed consent of the provider of the HGR. The Rules-MgmtHGR states that the written informed consent must ensure that the lawful rights and interests of providers of HGR are not infringed.

Per the MgmtHumanGen, to collect Chinese HGR for a clinical trial, the investigator must provide advance information to the participant on the purpose of collection, the possible impact on health, the protection of personal privacy, their participation is voluntary, and they have the right to withdraw unconditionally at any time. The participant must agree in writing. Information provided to the participant must be comprehensive, complete, true, accurate, and must not conceal information nor be misleading or deceiving.

The Measures-Ethics indicates that for the collection of biological samples involving humans, the informed consent must include the type, quantity, use, preservation, and utilization of biological samples (including whether they are directly used for product development, sharing, and secondary use), privacy protection, external provision, and destruction and disposal.

Consent for Human Genome Editing Research

As required in the GeneEdit-Ethics, human genome editing research should obtain clear and effective informed consent from research participants. The content of the informed consent form and the process of obtaining informed consent should be standardized and effective. If it is found that the risk may increase during the research process, the explicit informed consent of the research participants should be obtained again. If the research participant is a person without civil capacity, the consent of the legal representative/guardian should be obtained. If the research participant is a person with limited civil capacity, both the consent of the legal representative/guardian and the research participant should be obtained. Research participants can withdraw from genome-editing research unconditionally at any stage.

Requirements
(Legislation) Biosecurity Law of the People's Republic of China (Bioscrty-Law – Standard Chinese) (Effective April 15, 2021)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) Data Security Law of the People’s Republic of China (DataScrty - Standard Chinese) (Effective September 1, 2021)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) Drug Administration Law of the People's Republic of China (DAL – Standard Chinese) (Effective December 1, 2019)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) Minors Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China (MPL – Standard Chinese) (Effective June 1, 2021)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) Personal Information Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China (PIPL) (Effective November 1, 2021)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) Rules for the Implementation of Frontier Health and Quarantine Law of the People’s Republic of China (QuarantineLaw – Standard Chinese) (Last amended March 2, 2019)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) State Council Institutional Reform Plan (SC-IRP – Standard Chinese) (March 17, 2018)
National People’s Congress
(Legislation) Vaccine Administration Law (VaccineLaw – Standard Chinese) (Effective December 1, 2019)
National People’s Congress
(Regulation) Adjusting the Review and Approval Procedures for Drug Clinical Trials (No. 50 of 2018) (NMPA-No50-2018 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No50-2018 – Google Translation) (July 24, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Data Export Security Assessment Measures (No. 11) (CAC-No11-2022 – Standard Chinese) (Effective September 1, 2022)
Cyberspace Administration of China
(Regulation) Decision Concerning the Adjustment of the Administration of Imported Drug Registration (No. 35 of 2017) (NMPA-No35-2017 – Standard Chinese) (Effective October 10, 2017)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Decision of the State Council on Amending Some Administrative Regulations (Decree No. 709) (RegImplemDAL-Amndt – Standard Chinese) (Effective March 2, 2019)
State Council
(Regulation) Detailed Implementation Rules on the Management of Human Genetic Resources (No. 21) (Rules-MgmtHGR – Standard Chinese) (Effective July 1, 2023)
Ministry of Science and Technology
(Regulation) Drug Clinical Trial Registration and Information Disclosure Management Standards (No. 9 of 2020) (NMPA-No9-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No9-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Drug Registration Management Measures (Order No. 27) (DRR – Standard Chinese) (Effective July 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Ethical Review Measures for Life Sciences and Medical Research Involving Humans (Measures-Ethics – Standard Chinese) (February 18, 2023)
National Health Commission, Ministry of Education, and Ministry of Science and Technology
(Regulation) Health and Quarantine Regulations for the Entry and Exit of Special Items (AQSIQ-No160 - Standard Chinese) (Effective March 1, 2015)
General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection & Quarantine
(Regulation) Implementation of Electronic Submission of Drug Registration Applications (No. 110 of 2022) (NMPA-No110-2022 – Standard Chinese) (November 30, 2022)
National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Management Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Process (No. 437 of 2017) (QuarantineRules - Standard Chinese) (Effective November 1, 2017)
General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection & Quarantine
(Regulation) Management Measures for Communication and Exchange of Drug R&D and Technical Review (No. 48 of 2020) (NMPA-No48-2020 - Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No48-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective December 10, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Management Regulations for Safety Update Reports During Research and Development (No. 7 of 2020) (NMPA-No7-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No7-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Measures for Ethical Review of Biomedical Research Involving Humans (RegEthics – Standard Chinese) (Effective December 1, 2016)
National Health Commission
(Regulation) Measures for the Management of Clinical Research Projects Carried Out by Medical and Health Institutions (NHC-ClinProjMgmt - Standard Chinese) (Effective October 16, 2014)
National Health Commission
(Regulation) Measures for the Supervision and Inspection of Drug Clinical Trial Institutions (No. 56 of 2023) (NMPA-No56-2023 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No56-2023 – Google Translate) (Effective March 1, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Notice on the Promotion and Implementation of the Vaccine Administration Law (No. 32 of 2019) (NMPA-No32-2019 – Standard Chinese) (July 25, 2019)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Opinions on Deepening the Reform of the Review and Approval System to Encourage Innovation in Drugs and Medical Devices (No. 42 of 2017) (SC-Opinions-No42 – Standard Chinese) (October 8, 2017)
Chinese Communist Party’s Central Committee and State Council
(Regulation) Opinions on Reforming the Review and Approval System for Drugs and Medical Devices (No. 44 of 2015) (SC-Opinions-No44 – Standard Chinese) (August 9, 2015)
State Council
(Regulation) Opinions on Strengthening the Ethical Governance of Science and Technology (SC-EthicalGov – Standard Chinese) (March 20, 2022)
State Council
(Regulation) Optimization of Drug Registration Review and Approval (No. 23 of 2018) (NMPA-No23-2018 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No23-2018 – Google Translation) (Effective May 17, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation, and the National Health Commission
(Regulation) Pharmacovigilance Quality Management Standards (No. 65 of 2021) (NMPA-No65-2021 - Standard Chinese) (Effective December 1, 2021)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Provisions on the Functional Configuration, Internal Structure and Staffing of the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA-Org – Standard Chinese) (Effective July 29, 2018)
State Council
(Regulation) Provisions on the Functional Configuration, Internal Structure and Staffing of the State Administration for Market Regulation (SAMR-Org – Standard Chinese) (Effective July 30, 2018)
State Council
(Regulation) Provisions to Promote and Regulate Cross-border Data Flows (No. 16) (DataTrsfr-Regs – Standard Chinese) (Effective March 22, 2024)
Cyberspace Administration of China
(Regulation) Re-issuance of Drug Registration Fee Standards (No. 75 of 2020) (NMPA-No75-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No75-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Regulations for the Implementation of the Drug Administration Law of the People’s Republic of China (Decree No. 360) (RegImplemDAL – Standard Chinese)(Effective September 15, 2002) (Last amended March 2, 2019)
State Council
(Regulation) Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the Administration of Human Genetic Resources (No. 717) (MgmtHumanGen – Standard Chinese) (Effective July 1, 2019)
State Council
(Regulation) Regulations on the Administration of Drug Clinical Trial Institutions (No. 101 of 2019) (NMPA-NHC-No101-2019 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-NHC-No101-2019 – Google Translation) (Effective December 1, 2019)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation, and the National Health Commission
(Regulation) Safety Information Assessment and Management Standards During Drug Clinical Trials (No. 5 of 2020) (NMPA-No5-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No5-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Several Policies for Drug Registration, Review, and Approval (No. 230 of 2015) (NMPA-No230-2015 – Standard Chinese) (Effective November 11, 2015)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Standards for Submission and Review of Drug Clinical Trial Plans (No. 51 of 2023) (NMPA-No51-2023 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No51-2023 – Google Translation) (October 12, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Pharmacological Research of Biosimilars (No. 17 of 2022) (NMPA-No17-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No17-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective February 8, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Regulation) Technical Requirements for Pharmaceutical Research and Evaluation of Chemical Drugs Marketed Overseas But Not Marketed in China (No. 21 of 2021) (NMPA-No21-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No21-2021 – Google Translation) (March 8, 2021)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Regulation) Use of Electronic Payment Receipts for Drugs and Medical Device Product Registration Fees (No. 37 of 2022) (NMPA-No37-2022 – Standard Chinese) (Effective August 22, 2022)
National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Amendments to Good Manufacturing Practices for Pharmaceutical Products (No. 28) (NMPA-No28-2016) – Standard Chinese) (July 13, 2016)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Appendix to Good Manufacturing Practice for Drugs (2010 Revision) (No. 43 of 2022) (NMPA-No43-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No43-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2022)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Biological Product Registration Classification and Application Dossier Requirements (No. 43 of 2020) (NMPA-No43-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No43-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020 (registration) and October 1, 2020 (application))
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Changes to the Working Procedures During the Review of Drug Registration Applications (Prcdrs-Changes – Standard Chinese) (English-Prcrs-Changes – Google Translation) (November 9, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Chemical Drug Registration Classification and Application Material Requirements (No. 44 of 2020) (NMPA-No44-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No44-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020 (registration) and October 1, 2020 (application))
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Common Pharmaceutical Issues and Related Technical Requirements for Pre-Clinical Meetings for Phase III Clinical Trials of Innovative Chemical Drugs (Trial Implementation) (NMPA-No23-2023 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No23-2023 – Google Translation) (March 22, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Cybersecurity Standard Practice Guidelines - Guidelines for Identifying Sensitive Personal Information (Id-SPI – Standard Chinese) (English-Id-SPI – Google Translation) (Effective September 14, 2024)
China’s Secretariat of the National Cybersecurity Standardization Technical Committee
(Guidance) Drug Instructions and Label Management Regulations (SFDA Order No. 24) (ProvLabel – Standard Chinese) (Effective June 1, 2006)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Ethical Guidelines for Human Genome Editing Research (GeneEdit-Ethics – Standard Chinese) (English-GeneEdit-Ethics – Google Translation) (July 8, 2024)
National Science and Technology Ethics Committee, Central Science and Technology Commission, Party Central Committee
(Guidance) Filling in the Annual Work Summary Report of Drug Clinical Trial Institutions (No. 1 of 2024) (NMPA-No1-2024 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No1-2024 – Google Translation) (January 25, 2024)
National Food and Drug Administration Food and Drug Inspection Center, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Frequently Asked Questions and Answers on Rapid Reporting of Safety Data During Drug Clinical Trials (Version 2.0) (No. 17 of 2023) (NMPA-No17-2023 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No17-2023 – Google Translation) (March 17, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Good Clinical Practice for Drug Clinical Trials (No. 57 of 2020) (NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-GCP-No57-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Good Manufacturing Practice for Drugs (2010 Revision) (NMPA-GMP - Chinese) (Effective March 1, 2011)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Good Manufacturing Practices for Pharmaceutical Products (No. 13) (NMPA-No13-2015 – Standard Chinese) (Effective May 18, 2015)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guidelines for Classifying Adverse Events in Clinical Trials of Preventive Vaccines (No. 102 of 2019) (NMPA-No102-2019 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No102-2019 – Google Translation) (December 31, 2019)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guidelines for Comprehensive Analysis of the Effectiveness of Clinical Studies of Drugs (No. 59 of 2021) (NMPA-No59-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No59-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 23, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Drug Clinical Trial Data Management and Statistical Analysis Plan (No. 63 of 2021) (NMPA-No63-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No63-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 27, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for General Considerations of Drug Clinical Trials (No. 11 of 2017) (NMPA-No11-2017 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No11-2017 – Google Translation) (January 18, 2017)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guidelines for International Multicenter Drug Clinical Trials (No. 2 of 2015) (NMPA-No2-2015 – Standard Chinese) (March 1, 2015)
National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Pharmacovigilance Inspections (No. 22 of 2022) (NMPA-No22-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No22-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective April 15, 2022)
National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Submission of Drug Clinical Trial Data (No. 16 of 2020) (NMPA-No16-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No16-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective October 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Application of Patient-Reported Outcomes in Drug Clinical Research and Development (No. 62 of 2021) (NMPA-No62-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No62-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 27, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Establishment of Ethical Review Committees for Clinical Research Involving Humans (2023 Edition) (EC-Guide – Standard Chinese) (June 6, 2023)
Office of Medical Ethics Expert Committee of the National Health Commission and the Chinese Hospital Association
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Preservation of Essential Documents for Drug Clinical Trials (No. 37 of 2020) (NMPA-No37-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No37-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Summary, Analysis, and Reporting of Safety Information During Drug Clinical Trials (NMPA-No16-2023 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No16-2023 - Google Translation) (March 17, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Guiding Principles for Multiple Issues in Drug Clinical Trials (No. 66 of 2020) (NMPA-No66-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No66-2021 – Google Translation) (December 31, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guiding Principles for the Adaptive Design of Drug Clinical Trials (No. 6 of 2021) (NMPA-No6-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No6-2021 – Google Translation) (January 29, 2021)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Guiding Principles for Writing Clinical Risk Management Plans (No. 68 of 2021) (NMPA-No68-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No68-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 27, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Human Genetic Resources Service System: Application Guide (HGR-AppGuide – Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Health Commission
(Guidance) Interpretation of the Document "Measures for the Ethical Review of Life Science and Medical Research Involving Humans" (Measures-Ethics-Interp – Standard Chinese) (English-Measures-Ethics-Interp – Google Translation) (February 28, 2023)
National Health Commission
(Guidance) Interpretation of the Technical Guidelines for Accepting Data from Overseas Clinical Trials of Drugs (NMPA-No52-2018-Interp - Standard Chinese) (July 10, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Measures for the Supervision and Administration of Drug Production (No. 28 of 2020) (NMPA-No28-2020 – Standard Chinese) (Effective July 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Notice on the Requirements for Electronic Submission of Drug Registration Applications (ElectronicApps-Rqts – Standard Chinese) (December 2, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Pharmaceutical Research Information Guide for Phase III Clinical Trials of Innovative Chemical Drugs (No. 48 of 2018) (NMPA-No48-2018 - Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No48-2018 – Google Translation) (March 9, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Policy Interpretation of the Detailed Implementation Rules on the Management of Human Genetic Resources (Rules-MgmtHGR-Interp – Standard Chinese) (June 1, 2023)
Ministry of Science and Technology
(Guidance) Procedures for Safety Information Assessment and Risk Management during Drug Clinical Trials (Risk-Prcdr – Standard Chinese) (English-Risk-Prcdr – Google Translation) (November 3, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Requirements for Drug Records and Data Management for Trial Implementation (No. 74 of 2020) (NMPA-No74-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No74-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective December 1, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Standards and Procedures for the Rapid Reporting of Safety Data during Clinical Trials (G-SftyRptStds – Standard Chinese) (Effective May 1, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Statistical Guiding Principles for Centralized Monitoring of Drug Clinical Trials (No. 11 of 2022) (NMPA-No11-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No11-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective January 18, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Applying Decentralized Clinical Trials in Clinical Development of Rare Disease Drugs (DctrlzCTs-Rare – Standard Chinese) (English-DctrlzCTs-Rare – Google Translation) (May 30, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Changes in Marketed Chemical Drugs and Biological Products (Chngs-MktChemBio – Standard Chinese) (English-Chngs-MktChemBio – Google Translation) (February 10, 2021)
National Medical Productions Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Research and Development of Drugs for Rare Diseases (No. 71 of 2021) (NMPA-No71-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No71-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 31, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Trials of Chemical Compound Drugs (No. 15 of 2023) (NMPA-No15-2023 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No15-2023 – Google Translation) (March 17, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Trials of Gene Therapy Products for Rare Diseases (GeneCTs-Rare – Standard Chinese) (English-GeneCTs-Rare – Google Translation) (January 18, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Trials of Improved New Chemical Drugs (No. 54 of 2020) (NMPA-No54-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No54-2020 – Google Translation) (December 31, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Clinical Trials of Topically Administered and Locally Effective Drugs (No. 32 of 2022) (NMPA-No32-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No32-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective May 26, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Conditional Approval of Drugs for Marketing (CondtlAppl-Drugs – Standard Chinese) (English-CondtlAppl-Drugs – Google Translation) (November 19, 2020)
National Medical Productions Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Long-term Follow-up Clinical Research of Gene Therapy Products (No. 50 of 2021) (NMPA-No50-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No50-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 1, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Patient-Centered Drug Clinical Trial Design (PatientCtr-Design – Standard Chinese) (English-PatientCtr-Design – Google Translation) (July 27, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Change Research of Marketed Biological Products (Chngs-MktBio – Standard Chinese) (English-Chngs-MktBio – Google Translation) (June 25, 2021)
National Medical Productions Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Change Research of Marketed Chemical Drugs (Chngs-MktChem – Standard Chinese) (English-Chngs-MktChem – Google Translation) (February 10, 2021)
National Medical Productions Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Changes During Clinical Trials of Innovative Chemical Drugs (No. 22 of 2021) (NMPA-No22-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No22-2021 – Google Translation) (March 12, 2021)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Research and Changes of Biological Products during Clinical Trials (No. 29 of 2024) (NMPA-No29-2024 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No29-2024 – Google Translation) (June 7, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Research and Evaluation of Immune Cell Therapy Products (No. 30 of 2022) (NMPA-No30-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No30-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective May 26, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Research and Evaluation of In Vitro Genetic Modification Systems (No. 29 of 2022) (NMPA-No29-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No29-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective May 26, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Research and Evaluation of In Vivo Gene Therapy Products (No. 31 of 2022) (NMPA-No31-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No31-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective May 26, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Pharmaceutical Research and Evaluation of Specific Human Immunoglobulins (No. 27 of 2022) (NMPA-No27-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No27-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective May 20, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Protocol Changes During Drug Clinical Trials (No. 34 of 2022) (NMPA-No34-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No34-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective June 23, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for the Application of Phase I Clinical Trials of New Drugs (No. 16 of 2018) (NMPA-No16-2018 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No16-2018 – Google Translation) (January 11, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for the Evaluation of the Relevance of Adverse Events in Drug Clinical Trials (No. 31 of 2024) (NMPA-No31-2024 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No31-2024 – Google Translation) (June 7, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for the Implementation of Patient-Centered Drug Benefits - Risk Assessment (PatientCtr-Risk – Standard Chinese) (English-PatientCtr-Risk – Google Translation) (July 27, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for the Implementation of Patient-Centered Drug Clinical Trials (PatientCtr-Imp – Standard Chinese) (English-PatientCtr-Imp – Google Translation) (July 27, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for the Study of Human Bioavailability and Bioequivalence of Innovative Drugs (No. 4 of 2022) (NMPA-No4-2022 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No4-2022 – Google Translation) (Effective January 4, 2022)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guidelines for Writing Safety Reference Information in the Investigator's Manuals (No. 60 of 2021) (NMPA-No60-2021 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No60-2021 – Google Translation) (Effective December 23, 2021)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Guidance) Technical Guiding Principles for Accepting Data from Overseas Clinical Trials of Drugs (No. 52 of 2018) (NMPA-No52-2018 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No52-2018 – Google Translation) (July 6, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Working Procedures for Priority Review and Approval of Licensing (for Trial Implementation) (No. 82 of 2020) (NMPA-No82-2020 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No82-2020 – Google Translation) (Effective July 8, 2020)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Decree) Decision of the State Council on Amending and Abolishing Some Administrative Regulations (No. 777) (SC-Order777 – Standard Chinese) (Effective May 1, 2024)
State Council
(Decree) Regulations on Network Data Security Management (No. 790) (DataSec-Regs – Standard Chinese) (Effective January 1, 2025)
State Council
(Notice) Adjustment of Matters Related to the Management of Human Genetic Resources (HGR-WorkUpdt – Standard Chinese) (June 21, 2023)
Ministry of Science and Technology
(Notice) Adjustments to the Human Genetic Resources Management Information System (HGR-InfoSys – Standard Chinese) (September 26, 2023)
Ministry of Science and Technology
(Notice) Announcement from the National Health Commission Regarding “Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the Administration of Human Genetic Resources (NHC-HGRmgt – Standard Chinese) (April 25, 2024)
National Health Commission
(Notice) Application of the Secondary Guiding Principles of the International Council for Harmonsation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (No. 10 of 2018) (NMPA-No10-2018 – Standard Chinese) (January 25, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration 
(Notice) Approval of the Pilot Program of Optimizing the Review and Approval of Clinical Trials of Innovative Drugs in Beijing and Shanghai (No. 55 of 2024) (NMPA-No55-2024 – Standard Chinese) (August 2, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration
(Notice) FAQs on Human Genetic Resources Management (HGR-FAQs – Standard Chinese) (September 12, 2023)
Ministry of Science and Technology
(Notice) Matters Related to the Relocation of the Center for Drug Evaluation Office (CDE-Reloctn – Standard Chinese) (July 31, 2023)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Notice) Pilot Work Plan for Optimizing the Review and Approval of Clinical Trials of Innovative Drugs (No. 21 of 2024) (NMPA-No21-2024 – Standard Chinese) (July 31, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration
(Notice) Publication of the Work Plan for the Reform of the Classification and Registration of Chemical Drugs (No. 51 of 2016) (NMPA-No51-2016 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No51-2016 – Google Translation) (March 4, 2016)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Notice) Review and Approval Procedures for New Overseas Drugs for Clinical Urgent Needs (No. 79 of 2018) (NMPA-No79-2018 – Standard Chinese) (English-NMPA-No79-2018 – Google Translation) (October 23, 2018)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation, and the National Health Commission
(Notice) Use of the New Version of the Drug Production License and Other Licenses (NMPA-No72-2019 – Standard Chinese) (July 25, 2019)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
Additional Resources
(Guidance) Handling Guideline: Bioequivalence and Clinical Trial Filing of Chemical Generic Drugs (CHN-70 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Handling Guideline: Drug Clinical Trial Approval (CHN-14 – Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Handling Guideline: Drug Clinical Trial Institution Registration (CHN-12 – Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Handling Guideline: Drug Clinical Trial Registration (CHN-13 – Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Guidance) Handling Guideline: Priority Review and Approval of Drug Registration Applications (CHN-69 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Article) China Promulgates Revised Drug Registration Regulation (CHN-8) (April 29, 2020)
Covington
(Article) China: CFDA New Drug Import License Procedure (CHN-28) (January 15, 2020)
Roman, Reynaldo; Marken
(Article) China’s National Medical Products Administration Finalizes Two Implementing Rules of the Drug Administration Law (CHN-18) (April 2, 2020)
Li, Lei and Yang, Chen; Sidley Austin LLP
(Article) In Review: The Life Sciences Regulatory Regime in China (CHN-20) (March 24, 2021)
Gu, Aaron and Balzano, John C.; Covington & Burling LLP
(Article) Interpretation of the "Measures for Ethical Review of Biomedical Research Involving Humans" (CHN-41 - Standard Chinese) (November 7, 2016)
National Health Commission
(Article) Legal Protection of the Rights of Clinical Trial Subjects in China (CHN-26) (March 26, 2018)
Ren, Y., Jin, X., Jiang, S., Jiang, B.; The Journal of Biomedical Research
(Article) Life Sciences: Product Regulation and Liability in China (CHN-11) (January 7, 2019)
Wang, Katherine and Wu, Tina; Ropes & Gray
(Article) National Medical Products Newsletter, 2020. Volume 5 (CHN-1) (May 2020)
China Center for Food and Drug International Exchange (CCFDIE)
(Article) The Regulatory Requirements and Key Points of Drug Clinical Trials Registration in China (CHN-7) (May 20, 2020)
Yao, Zhuxing and Wang, Haixue; Applied Clinical Trials
(Article) Xi Jinping Hosted the Ninth Meeting of the Central Committee for Comprehensive Deepening Reform (CHN-3 - Standard Chinese) (July 24, 2019)
Xinhua News Agency
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (CHN-30) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (CHN-84) (October 19, 2013)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) ICH Guideline E2B (R3) on Electronic Transmission of Individual Case Safety Reports (ICSRs) - Data Elements and Message Specification - Implementation Guide (CHN-40) (Step 5 Version) (Implemented July 1, 2022)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Guideline: The Common Technical Document for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (M4) (CHN-38) (Step 5 Versions) (Modules range from 2002-2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (CHN-39) (Step 5 Version) (Implemented May 1, 2018)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (CHN-37) (Step 5 Version) (Implemented July 1, 2020)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) Applicant's Window (CHN-58 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Webpage) China Human Genetic Resources Management Office (CHN-4 – Standard Chinese) (October 10, 2022)
China National Center for Biotechnology Development, Ministry of Science and Technology
(Webpage) China International Trade Single Window (CHN-2 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
General Administration of Customs of the People's Republic of China
(Webpage) Contact Us (CHN-31 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) Country Profile: China (CHN-55) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) Drug and Medical Device Clinical Trial Institution Registration Management Information System (CHN-82 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) Drug Clinical Trial Registration and Information Disclosure Platform (CHN-53 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Webpage) Entry-Exit Health Quarantine Approval for Special Items (CHN-54 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
General Administration of Customs of the People's Republic of China
(Webpage) Human Genetic Resources Service System Login (CHN-6 – Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
Ministry of Science and Technology
(Webpage) ICH Guidelines (CHN-49 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration
(Webpage) Internal Organization (CHN-77 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) Main Duties of National Medical Products Administration (CHN-78 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) Members and Observers (CHN-59) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) National Medical Products Administration – Drug Regulatory Documents (CHN-60 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) National Medical Products Administration Government Service Portal Login (CHN-71 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) National Medical Products Administration (CHN-81 - Standard Chinese) (Current as of December 19, 2024)
National Medical Products Administration, State Administration for Market Regulation
(Webpage) What is AQSIQ? (CHN-46) (Last Updated January 28, 2022)
General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection & Quarantine
(Webpage) What We Do (CHN-24) (Last Updated September 22, 2018)
National Health Commission
Forms
(Form) Ethics Review Application for Research Involving Humans (CHN-27) (English-CHN-27 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Shanghai Ethics Committee for Clinical Research
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

DRC
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
Unspecified
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
Yes
Clinical trial registration required
Yes
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
No
Age of minors
Under 18
Specimens export allowed
Unspecified
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (ACOREP)

As per D-ACOREP, the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention) is the regulatory authority responsible for regulating clinical trials in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). Per DRC-4, the Clinical Trials Directorate is responsible for clinical trial authorization and monitoring. See DRC-4 for the Clinical Trials Directorate organizational chart.

As stated in DRC-6, ACOREP is responsible for proposing any legislation or regulation relating to the quality and safety of medicines, foods, medical devices, herbal products, cosmetics, psychotropic drugs, and other health products. In collaboration with the Ministry of Foreign Trade, ACOREP also authorizes and controls the import, export, manufacture, labeling, marking or identification, storage, promotion, sale, and distribution of the aforementioned products, or any material or substance used in their manufacture.

In accordance with D-ACOREP, the equipment and infrastructures of the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM)) and the National Quality Control Laboratory (Laboratoire National de Contrôle Qualité (LAPHAKI)) became the assets of ACOREP as of March 5, 2020. ACOREP is comprised of a Board of Directors, the General Management, and the College of Auditors. (Note: ClinRegs will continue to reference DPM documents when this name is still used in website and regulatory material. New ACOREP regulations will be incorporated into the DRC profile as they become available.)

Order1250-SP013 indicates that the DRC’s National System of Pharmacovigilance, implemented by ACOREP, aims to identify as early as possible all the adverse effects of health products, especially those that are serious and unexpected. It includes ACOREP’s National Pharmacovigilance Commission, which evaluates the risks incurred by participants in a clinical trial and advises ACOREP on the trial’s continuation or discontinuation. In addition, the National Pharmacovigilance Center, established within the University of Kinshasa’s Unit of Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacovigilance, is responsible for collecting information from manufacturers, health professionals, and other individuals on the adverse effects of health products; establishing accountability; and assessing the relative risk. See DRC-16 for more information on ACOREP’s Pharmacovigilance Department.

Other Considerations

Please note: DRC is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (DRC-1), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see DRC-7.

Contact Information

Per DRC-5 and DRC-9, ACOREP’s contact information is as follows:

Ministry of Health
Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (ACOREP)
66 Boulevard du 30 juin immeuble
5à sec 4 eme niveau
Kinshasa, République démocratique du Congo

Phone: +243 824 007 007
Email: contact@acorep.gouv.cd

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Overview

According to D-ACOREP, the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention) is the regulatory authority responsible for regulating clinical trials, as well as authorizing and controlling drug imports and exports, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). In addition, the G-EthicalEval indicates that an ethics committee (EC) must review the scientific validity and ethical acceptability of any research proposal involving human subjects.

As per the G-EthicalEval, the study protocol must be submitted to the EC for review concurrently with a request to ACOREP for study authorization and registration, with ACOREP approval contingent upon EC approval. However, AppAuthCTReqs indicates that EC approval is a required element of the clinical trial authorization application to ACOREP. Per DRC-12, ACOREP accepts ethics review from any approved local EC.

Clinical Trial Review Process

DRC-12 states that upon receiving a clinical trial application, ACOREP screens it for completeness. The G-EthicalEval indicates that in the event of a favorable opinion from the EC, ACOREP decides whether to approve the trial. If the EC issues an adverse opinion, ACOREP cannot authorize the study.

Per DRC-12, ACOREP issues a decision on whether to approve or deny a complete application within 30 days. The decision is sent to the principal investigator (PI) by email, or the PI can pick up a hard copy of the decision at the secretariat of ACOREP.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (ACOREP)

According to Order1250-MSPHP058, the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention) charges a fee for the submission of a clinical trial application.

Per Order1250-MSPHP058, the following application fees are for the authorization to conduct clinical trials funded by a local sponsor:

Human drugs – $4,000 USD
Under study – $1,000 USD
Operational research study – $1,000 USD
Observational study – $200 USD
For unforeseen cases – $100 USD
Change in clinical trials – $50 USD
Order1250-MSPHP058 additionally states that the following application fees are for the authorization to conduct clinical trials funded by a non-resident sponsor:

Human drug Phase I study – $5,000 USD
Human drug Phase II study – $4,000 USD
Human drug Phase III or IV study – $3,000 USD
For unforeseen cases – $500 USD
Operational research – $1,000 USD
Bioequivalence/bioavailability – $300 USD
Observational study – $1,000 USD
Minor change in clinical trials – $150 USD
Major change in clinical trials – $500 USD
Temporary authorization for the use of medicinal products for human use under clinical trials – $3,000 USD
Payment Instructions

Per Order1250-MSPHP058, those liable for fees must pay the related fees into bank accounts opened in ACOREP’s name in the books of authorized commercial banks. See Circular0349 for payment instructions.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Overview

According to the G-EthicalEval, any research proposal in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) involving human participants must be submitted for evaluation of its scientific validity and ethical acceptability to an ethics committee (EC). An EC may be established under the auspices of national or local health authorities, national (or centralized) medical research councils, or other national representative bodies. Additionally, the EC must be independent of the research team and approved by the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention).

Order1250-ZKM043 indicates that the purpose of the DRC’s national EC, the National Committee of Health Ethics (Comité National d'Éthique de la Santé (CNES)), is to review proposals for research on human beings based on the ethical principles of respect for the individual, beneficence, and justice. The CNES is also responsible for promoting the creation of and accrediting institutional ECs across the country, among other duties.

Ethics Committee Composition

The G-EthicalEval indicates that an EC should be made up of physicians, scientists, and representatives of other groups, such as nurses, lawyers, ethicists, and non-professionals, who are able to represent the cultural and moral values of the community and uphold the rights of the research participants. An EC must include both men and women.

According to the G-EthicalEval, to ensure the EC is composed of members that have experience as well as new members with a fresh perspective, a certain number of EC members may be renewed periodically. In addition, to ensure the independence of ECs and to avoid any conflict of interest, any members of the committee having special interests, direct or indirect, in a research proposal must exclude themselves from the evaluation of the proposal.

National Committee of Health Ethics (CNES)

As per Order1250-ZKM043, the CNES has 40 members, including:

One (1) delegate per province from institutional ECs
Scientific individuals (at most 10)
Religious individuals (at most five (5))
A delegate from the Order of Physicians
A delegate of the Order of the Pharmacists
A delegate from other health professional associations
A delegate from the Health Administration
Additionally, Order1250-ZKM043 states that CNES members are recruited on the basis of the following criteria:

Proven moral and scientific reputation
Professional experience of at least five (5) years
Practical training in bioethics
Great availability
Community leadership
Order1250-ZKM043 further indicates that CNES’ mandate is five (5) years, which is renewable once. The CNES is governed by an office composed of a president, a vice-president, a secretary-rapporteur, a deputy secretary-general, and a treasurer, all elected by and from among the members. The government’s Public Health authority appoints members of the office.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

The G-EthicalEval states that the EC’s written procedures must define all EC operating standards.

According to the G-EthicalEval, an EC must clearly define the roles necessary for smooth ethical evaluation. The different roles within the EC (such as president and secretary), the requirements of each role, the terms and conditions of attaining a role, and the duties and responsibilities associated with the roles must be detailed in writing.

As per the G-EthicalEval, EC members should receive basic training and access to continuing education on the ethical and scientific aspects of biomedical research. The conditions of appointment should detail the arrangements for providing EC members with initial training on the EC's work, as well as opportunities to strengthen their expertise in conducting an ethics review. These provisions should also include the requirements or expectations for basic and continuing education of EC members. This training can be carried out in the context of cooperation with other ECs in the country or region, and also on other occasions favorable to the basic training and the continuous training of the EC’s members.

The G-EthicalEval indicates that the EC is responsible for establishing well-defined procedures for submitting an application for review. These procedures, as well as any standard forms, must be public and available to applicants. In order to aid researchers, it is desirable that these procedures and forms be harmonized among all the active ECs in the country.

The G-EthicalEval requires that ECs establish specific quorum requirements to review a proposal and make a decision. These requirements must include or specify at least the following:

The minimum number of members required to reach a quorum
The professional qualifications required and distribution of these requirements within the quorum
No quorum shall be composed exclusively of members of the same profession or the same sex
The quorum must include at least one (1) member whose primary area of expertise is not scientific and at least one (1) independent member of the institution or research site
The G-EthicalEval further requires that an EC meet regularly, on scheduled dates announced in advance in a publicly available calendar. The meeting requirements must include or specify at least the following:

Meetings should be scheduled according to a pre-established schedule, which can be modified according to the workload
EC members should have sufficient time, defined before the meeting, to review submitted documents
Meetings must be documented in minutes, and there must be a procedure for approval of the minutes
The applicant, the sponsor, and/or the investigator may be invited to present their proposal or to elaborate on certain specific points
Independent consultants may be invited to the meeting or provide written comments, subject to the confidentiality agreements in force
The EC must send its opinion within 15 days of the meeting
National Committee of Health Ethics (CNES)

According to Order1250-ZKM043, the CNES’ operating mode and the frequency of meetings are determined by internal regulations previously submitted to the Minister of Health for review. The CNES operates in committees and may create, as needed, ad-hoc subcommittees for specific problems. Additionally, the CNES may call upon any resource person whose expertise or experience can be used to resolve or address a problem. The CNES draws up its action plan and activity reports and is subject to the authority of the Ministry of Health, to which it reports.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Overview

The G-EthicalEval indicates that the main task of an ethics committee (EC) is to review research proposals and supporting documents, with particular attention to the process of obtaining informed consent, documentation, and the relevance and feasibility of the protocol. The EC must take into account previous scientific and ethical assessments, if any, and the requirements of applicable laws and regulations. An EC may perform its function at the institutional, local, regional, or national level.

According to the G-EthicalEval, ECs are responsible for protecting the rights of research participants, their safety, and their well-being. ECs must act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved by evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants; confirming the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, methods, and scientific design of the study; assessing the participant recruitment process; and verifying the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

According to the G-EthicalEval, the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention)’s Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) and the EC must approve a clinical trial application for research involving human participants prior to the sponsor or the principal investigator (PI) initiating the clinical trial. The G-EthicalEval further specifies that the PI must submit the request for ethics review. Per DRC-12, ACOREP accepts ethics review from any approved local EC.

As per the G-EthicalEval, the study protocol must be submitted to the EC for review concurrently with a request to ACOREP for study authorization and registration. However, AppAuthCTReqs indicates that EC approval is a required element of the clinical trial authorization application to ACOREP.

The G-EthicalEval states that the EC must communicate its opinion on the protocol to the PI. A copy of the EC’s opinion should be sent to ACOREP. EC approval of the protocol must be obtained before ACOREP may approve the trial. In the event of a favorable opinion from the EC, ACOREP decides whether to approve the trial. If the EC issues an adverse opinion, ACOREP cannot authorize the study. However, the PI may resubmit the protocol to the EC after modifying the elements that led to the adverse opinion.

According to the G-EthicalEval, ECs must establish procedures for expedited review of research proposals. These procedures must address certain processes, including the nature of the requests, amendments, and other considerations acceptable for expedited review, as well as the quorum requirements for expedited review.

As per the G-EthicalEval, ECs must also establish a procedure for monitoring the progress of all research that has been approved, from the date the decision was made to the end of the research. The follow-up intervals should be determined by the nature of the study and other events, although each protocol should be monitored at least once a year during the recruitment period. The EC must review and approve any protocol amendments prior to those changes being implemented.

The G-EthicalEval also indicates that the PI must agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3).

There is no stated expiration date for an EC approval in the G-EthicalEval.

(See the Submission Process section for detailed submission requirements.)

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
According to the G-EthicalEval, an ethics committee (EC) may charge a fee for the ethical and scientific evaluation of research protocols, to be directed toward its operating costs. The fee must be a predetermined public rate and should not exceed 2% of research costs, excluding the cost of investment. Applicants should contact ECs individually for specific fees and payment instructions.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Overview

Order1250-ZKM043 indicates that the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s (DRC) national ethics committee (EC), the National Committee of Health Ethics (Comité National d'Éthique de la Santé (CNES)), is responsible for promoting the creation of and accrediting institutional ECs across the country.

According to Order1250-ZKM043, the CNES coordinates the national network of institutional ECs, both public and private, throughout the country, and mobilizes funds for the functioning of the network of ECs.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

No information is available on registration, auditing, and accreditation responsibilities by the CNES.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Overview

Per D-ACOREP and the G-EthicalEval, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) requires clinical trial authorization from the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention). According to DRC-12, the sponsor, through the principal investigator (PI), obtains this authorization from ACOREP. In addition, the G-EthicalEval indicates that the PI is required to obtain approval from an ethics committee (EC) for any research proposal involving human subjects. The study protocol must be submitted to the EC for review concurrently with a request to ACOREP for study authorization and registration. ACOREP approval is contingent upon EC approval. However, AppAuthCTReqs indicates that EC approval is a required element of the clinical trial authorization application to ACOREP.

Regulatory Submission

Per DRC-12, ACOREP’s delivery address is:

Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention
Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)
4ème niveau, immeubles 5 à sec, boulevard du 30 juin
Kinshasa I, B.P. 11998, République Démocratique du Congo

Ethics Review Submission

The G-EthicalEval indicates that the EC is responsible for establishing well-defined procedures for submitting an application for review, including requirements for language and assembly. These procedures, as well as any standard forms, must be public and available to applicants. In order to aid researchers, it is desirable that these procedures and forms be harmonized between all the active ECs in the country. Applicants should contact ECs individually for specific submission instructions.

According to a subject matter expert as of March 2019, research protocols and relevant materials to be submitted to the national EC, the National Committee of Health Ethics (Comité National d'Éthique de la Santé (CNES)), should be sent to:

National Committee of Health Ethics
Local 5, Immeuble PNMLS, 1er Niveau, Commune of Kasa-Vubu
Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo

Per a subject matter expert as of March 2019, CNES requires one (1) copy of the dossier, in addition to seven (7) copies of the protocol. Documents submitted to CNES must be in French.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

Per DRC-17 and AppAuthCTReqs, a clinical trial authorization application to the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention) must be accompanied by the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Full and abbreviated titles of the clinical trial
Phase of the clinical trial to be conducted
Table of contents
Cover letter with site address, telephone number, and email address
A non-refundable application fee in accordance with the prescribed fee schedule
Clinical Trial Application Form (DRC-17) signed by the authorized persons (principal investigator (PI) and authorized representative of the sponsor)
A copy of the proposed final protocol(s) and its amendments, with the version number
Proof of registration in a clinical trial registry
Investigator's Brochure (IB)
Information on investigational product(s) (IP(s)) and ancillary supplies
Common Technical Document (CTD) file for the IP(s)
Copy of the Summary of Product Characteristics or a copy of the Certificate of Pharmaceutical Product for the IP (if applicable)
Good manufacturing practice (GMP) certificate and/or evidence of GMP compliance
Good clinical practice (GCP) certificate and curriculum vitae (CV) of the PI and/or co-investigator(s) for each site
Ethics committee (EC) approval
Insurance coverage or valid local insurance policy covering trial participants
Joint signed and dated declaration between the sponsor and the PI/investigator for sufficient funds in the prescribed format
Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) membership and signed charter
Signed and dated contractual agreement between the sponsor and the PI
Letters of access authorizing access to related files (drug master files, site reference files)
List of competent authorities in other countries to which the same application has been submitted and details of the decisions, if available
Clinical trial site agreement/contract
Informed consent forms (ICFs) and assent forms (if applicable) in French and the four (4) national languages
Statistical analysis plan
Material transfer agreement, if applicable
Copy of the participant information leaflet
Copy of the case report forms to be used (paper or electronic copy)
Capacity building plan including training and refresher training for personnel involved in the trial
Good laboratory practice (GLP) and assay validation
IP labeling materials
Shipping conditions for the IP and related materials
Protocol and version number
IP name/code
Proposed indication for use
Target population/characteristics of trial participants
Total number of participants to be enrolled in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)
Planned start and end date
Information on study sites
Sponsor name and contact information
AppAuthCTReqs further states that the applicant must ensure that all the above requirements are met before submitting the application. While AppAuthCTReqs states that EC approval must be submitted as part of the application to ACOREP, the G-EthicalEval states that the study protocol must be submitted to the EC for review concurrently with a request to ACOREP for study authorization and registration.

Ethics Committee Requirements

As specified in the G-EthicalEval, the PI must file the request for ethics review. The requirements for the submission must be clearly described in the EC’s application procedures. These requirements must include or specify at least the following:

Name(s) and address(es) of the secretary of the EC or the member(s) to whom the application is to be filed
Application form(s), made available by the EC, with a list of the documentation requested by the EC
Format of the application, clearly referring to the title, date, and version of the protocol
Documentation, the study protocol, the ICF, the IB, the PI's CV, and the certificate of insurance obtained
Language(s) in which the (essential) documents are to be filed
Number of copies to be filed
Application deadlines, based on review dates (15 days prior to the meeting)
Means by which the receipt of applications will be acknowledged, including communication regarding incomplete applications
Deadline for notification of the decision after examination (within 15 days)
Time limit in case the EC requests additional information or changes to the documents from the PI
Application examination fee, if applicable
Standard procedure for requesting amendments to the protocol
As per the G-EthicalEval, the following documentation must be submitted to the EC for the proposed research:

Application form dated and signed by the PI
Proposed research protocol (clearly identified and dated), describing objectives, data collection procedures, ethical considerations, and details of the research process
Supporting documents for information not detailed in the protocol
When the research involves a product under study (such as a drug or medical device), an adequate summary of all available safety, pharmacological, pharmaceutical, and toxicological data available on the product being evaluated, as well as a summary of the clinical experience gained to date on this product
Current CVs of the investigator(s), dated and signed
Planned means (including classified advertising) for the recruitment of potential research participants, if not described in the protocol
Description of the procedure to obtain the informed consent of the subjects according to the degree of instruction, if not sufficiently described in the protocol
Information pamphlet (clearly identified and dated) and other forms of information for potential participants, in the language(s) understood by them and, if necessary, in other languages
ICF (clearly identified and dated) in the language(s) understood by potential participants and, if necessary, in other languages
Statement regarding possible compensation for research subjects, for their participation (including reimbursement of expenses and access to medical care), if not sufficiently described in the protocol
Description of arrangements made, if any, for compensation for injury, if not sufficiently described in the protocol or certificate of insurance
A copy of the sponsor’s insurance policy, for the insurance coverage of the participants (if in a language other than French, a translation into French must also be provided)
Statement by the investigator committing to respect the ethical principles set out in the applicable guidelines, if not sufficiently described in the protocol
Any significant prior decisions made by other ECs or regulatory authorities regarding the research in question (whether in the same research site or another) and an indication of the change(s) made to the protocol in this regard (reasons for previous adverse decisions must be provided)
Any other information, such as the establishment of a Tolerance Data Monitoring Committee, also known as DSMB or Independent Committee
Clinical Protocol

According to the G-EthicalEval, the protocol should be prepared by the researcher(s) and contain a summary of the project, general information, a brief justification of the project, bibliographical references, and a documentary review. The protocol should describe the goals and objectives of the study, as well as its design and the methodology used. In addition, the protocol should address safety or tolerability considerations, monitoring, statistical data management and analysis, quality assurance, expected results and dissemination, and publication policy.

The G-EthicalEval further requires that the protocol provide guidance on the duration of the project and anticipated problems, project management and ethical considerations, the documents used to gather informed consent from subjects, the budget and funding agencies, and collaborators. Finally, the protocol should attach the CV of each researcher, listing all the projects in which the researcher is currently participating, and the percentage of time to be devoted to the project. Possible financing or insurance arrangements should also be specified in documents presented to the EC.

The G-EthicalEval also indicates that the PI must agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3). DRC-3 requires the following protocol contents:

General information (protocol title, identifying number, and date; contact information for the sponsor, medical expert, investigator(s), trial site(s), qualified physician(s), and laboratory and/or institutions involved in the study)
Background information
Objectives and purpose
Trial design
Selection, withdrawal, and treatment of participants
Assessment of efficacy
Assessment of safety
A description of the statistical methods to be used in the trial
Direct access to source data and documents
Quality control and quality assurance
Ethical considerations
Data handling and recordkeeping
Publication policy
Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Overview

As per D-ACOREP, the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention) is the regulatory authority responsible for regulating clinical trials in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).

The G-EthicalEval indicates that for research involving human subjects, the study protocol must be submitted to an ethics committee (EC) for review concurrently with a request to ACOREP for study authorization and registration. However, the principal investigator (PI) must obtain the EC’s approval of the protocol before ACOREP may approve the trial. However, AppAuthCTReqs indicates that EC approval is a required element of the clinical trial authorization application to ACOREP.

Regulatory Authority Approval

No official timelines are specified in the available regulatory documentation.

Ethics Committee Approval

As per the G-EthicalEval, the EC must communicate its opinion on the protocol to the PI within 15 days of making a decision, and send a copy to ACOREP.

The G-EthicalEval further requires that ECs establish procedures for expedited review of research proposals. These procedures must address certain processes, including the nature of the requests, amendments, and other considerations acceptable for expedited review, as well as the quorum requirements for expedited review.

There is no stated expiration date for an EC approval in the regulatory resources referenced for the DRC.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Overview

As per D-ACOREP and the G-EthicalEval, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) requires clinical trial authorization from the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention). According to DRC-12, the sponsor, through the principal investigator (PI), obtains this authorization from ACOREP. As stated in the G-EthicalEval, for research proposals involving human participants, the PI must also obtain approval from an ethics committee (EC) before ACOREP can approve the trial. Per DRC-12, ACOREP accepts ethics review from any approved local EC.

According to DRC-12, an import license is required for the shipment of the investigational product (IP) to be used in the trial. The sponsor may apply for IP import approval through ACOREP’s Digital Platform (DRC-13). (See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information).

Clinical Trial Agreement

The G-EthicalEval states that before submitting a clinical trial application, a memorandum of understanding must be developed between the sponsor or PI and the partner research institutions. The PI must agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3).

According to DRC-17 and AppAuthCTReqs, a signed and dated contractual agreement between the sponsor and the PI, as well as a clinical trial site agreement/contract, are required elements of a clinical trial application to ACOREP. As per DRC-3, the sponsor should obtain the investigator's/institution's agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with GCP, with the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and with the approved protocol
Comply with procedures for data recording/reporting
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain the trial related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution these documents are no longer needed
DRC-3 indicates that the sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement.

Clinical Trial Registration

As per DRC-17 and AppAuthCTReqs, proof of enrollment in a clinical trial registry is a required element of a clinical trial application to ACOREP.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

As delineated in the G-PV, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s (DRC) safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any medical event occurring after the administration of a drug to a patient or subject of a clinical trial, without necessarily being caused by that drug. This includes any harmful and unwanted reaction such as a clinical or paraclinical sign or symptom, or a disease associated with taking a drug
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – Any response to the administration of a drug that is harmful and undesirable. An ADR may result from the use of a drug at therapeutic doses, overdose, misuse, or medication error
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) – Any adverse reaction that causes death, is life-threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization, leads to significant or persistent disability, or causes congenital malformation
Unexpected Adverse Event (UAE) – Any adverse event that does not match the known information on the drug in nature, severity, or outcome
According to the G-PV, the requirements in the G-PV are based on the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3). The G-EthicalEval further indicates that before the start of the trial, the principal investigator (PI) must ensure adequate safety reporting procedures in accordance with DRC-3 and the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10).

Order1250-SP013 states that the DRC’s National System of Pharmacovigilance, implemented by the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention), aims to identify as early as possible all of the adverse effects of health products, especially those that are serious and unexpected. The National System of Pharmacovigilance includes the National Pharmacovigilance Center, which is responsible for collecting information from manufacturers, health professionals, and other individuals on the adverse effects of health products; establishing accountability; and assessing the relative risk.

Safety Reporting Requirements

The G-PV indicates that it is mandatory to report any AE, even when it is the result of abuse or misuse. All providers are required to systematically report AEs.

According to G-PV, all AEs that are both serious and unexpected must be reported through the expedited notification process. Any serious and unexpected AE that is fatal or life-threatening, including those occurring during a clinical trial, should be notified to the National Pharmacovigilance Center as soon as the notifier becomes aware of it, within seven (7) calendar days. Updated information may be provided within an additional period not exceeding 15 calendar days. All other serious and unexpected AEs should be reported immediately, but no later than 15 calendar days after becoming aware of them. All other AEs must be reported within 90 calendar days.

In addition, according to DRC-12, SAEs must be reported to the national ethics committee (EC), the National Committee of Health Ethics (Comité National d’Éthique de la Santé (CNES)), or to the EC that approved the study.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

As per the G-PV, all AEs must be reported on a form (See Annex I of G-PV) and submitted in a sealed envelope or via internet to the National Pharmacovigilance Center:

Clinical Pharmacology Unit
Faculty of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences
University of Kinshasa
Tel: 0998110172 / 0813261360 / 0993547926 / 0815171991 / 0815171766
Email: cnpvrdc@yahoo.fr and pharmacoclinique@unikin.ac.cd

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

The G-EthicalEval also indicates that the principal investigator (PI) must agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3).

DRC-3 notes that the investigator should submit written summaries of the trial status to the institutional ethics committee (EC) annually, or more frequently, if requested by the EC. The investigator should also promptly provide written reports to the sponsor and the institutional EC on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to participants.

As per the G-EthicalEval, the EC must establish a procedure for monitoring the progress of all research that has been approved, from the date the decision was made to the end of the research. The follow-up intervals should be determined by the nature of the study and other events, although each protocol should be monitored at least once a year during the recruitment period.

Final Report

According to the G-EthicalEval, the PI must notify the EC of the closure of a study, and the EC should receive a copy of the final summary or final report of the research.

The G-EthicalEval further requires that community leaders receive an adapted report specifically for their understanding, with the relevant information. The results of the clinical trial should be shared with the participants based on the context and budgetary constraints.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
As per the G-EthicalEval, the sponsor is defined as the person, company, institute, or organization responsible for launching, managing, and/or financing a clinical trial, as well as legally responsible for the trial. In non-commercial research, it is often the case that the sponsor and the funding agency are different entities. In this case, the legal responsibility rests with the sponsor.

The G-EthicalEval indicates that for biomedical research on humans, the sponsor is the person who initiates, manages, and verifies the funding of the research.

The G-EthicalEval also indicates that the principal investigator (PI) must agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3). DRC-3 specifies that a sponsor-investigator is an individual who both initiates and conducts, alone or with others, a clinical trial, and under whose immediate direction the investigational product is administered to, dispensed to, or used by a participant. The term does not include any person other than an individual (e.g., it does not include a corporation or an agency). The obligations of a sponsor-investigator include both those of a sponsor and those of an investigator.

DRC-3 also notes that a sponsor may transfer any or all trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO) and/or institutional site(s). However, the ultimate responsibility for the trial data’s quality and integrity always resides with the sponsor. Any trial-related responsibilities transferred to a CRO should be specified in a written agreement. The CRO should implement quality assurance and quality control.

According to the G-EthicalEval, a sponsor may be domestic or foreign.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Overview

According to the G-EthicalEval, the principal investigator (PI) must be a qualified and experienced person in the relevant field of research, with an understanding of the concepts and research activities, the drug, its toxicity, and its safety. The PI reports to the sponsor, as well as to the regulatory authorities and the ethics committees (ECs).

Per the G-EthicalEval, before a trial begins, the PI must:

Be based in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), with some exceptions
Ensure that the approval of a recognized EC and regulatory authority are obtained, and that the information package developed by the sponsor regarding clinical trials has been read and accepted
Have a good knowledge of the protocol, related documents, and regulatory requirements of the regulatory authority or other regulatory body
Have read, understood, and agreed to work in accordance with the protocol, the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3), or other applicable legal and regulatory documents
Use the investigational product (IP) only for the purpose of the study as described in the protocol
Take responsibility for the IP
Document the sequence of events to be followed in the conduct of the clinical trial, including the timeline, roles, and responsibilities
Ensure the availability of all necessary infrastructure, equipment, and finances for the conduct of the test or study
Develop any appropriate mechanism to obtain informed consent from the participant
Accept the involvement of the instructors to review and verify the quality control procedures and the conduct of the data
Accept the possibility of an audit and/or inspection by an independent auditor engaged by the sponsor, the regulator, or the EC
Obtain the right to publish (it is unethical for the sponsor to reserve the right to publish the research data)
Ensure adequate safety reporting procedures, etc. (see DRC-3 and DRC-10)
As per DRC-3, the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s)/institution(s). Each investigator should be qualified by training and experience and should have adequate resources to properly conduct the trial for which the investigator is selected. If the organization of a coordinating committee and/or the selection of coordinating investigator(s) are to be utilized in multicenter trials, their organization and/or selection are the sponsor's responsibility. Before entering an agreement with an investigator/institution to conduct a trial, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the protocol and an up-to-date investigator's brochure, and the sponsor should provide sufficient time for the investigator/institution to review the protocol and the information provided.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

The G-EthicalEval requires that if a sponsor is a foreign person or entity, the sponsor must work closely with the PI(s) from the partner institution(s) with which the sponsor has signed a memorandum of understanding. Each PI, who must be based in the DRC, in turn works with one (1) or more local investigators at their site.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

The G-EthicalEval indicates that, as appropriate, the EC should evaluate the adequacy of the arrangements made for monitoring and auditing research, including setting up a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB). Any information regarding the establishment of a DSMB should also be included in the documentation submitted to the EC in the clinical trial application packet. Per DRC-17 and AppAuthCTReqs, DSMB membership and signed charter information must also be included in the clinical trial application to the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention).

DRC-3 notes that a DSMB may be established to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial.

Multicenter Studies

As delineated in DRC-3, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor, and given EC approval
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication among investigators is facilitated
The G-EthicalEval also states that a coordinating investigator should be appointed to coordinate activities of PIs at each site of a multicenter trial.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Insurance

As per the G-EthicalEval, the sponsor is required to carry a valid insurance policy to cover research participants. A copy of the sponsor’s insurance policy must be submitted to the ethics committee (EC) as part of the application for ethics review of the proposed research. If the insurance policy is in a language other than French, a French translation must also be provided.

Per DRC-17 and AppAuthCTReqs, documentation regarding insurance coverage or a valid local insurance policy covering trial participants must also be included in the clinical trial application to the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention).

Compensation

The G-EthicalEval indicates that the principal investigator (PI) must agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3). DRC-3 provides guidance for sponsors on providing compensation to research participants.

Injury or Death

The G-EthicalEval indicates that the clinical trial application packet submitted to the ethics committee (EC) must include a description of arrangements made, if any, for compensation for injury, if not sufficiently described in the protocol or certificate of insurance.

DRC-3 states that the sponsor must explain to participants the compensation and/or treatment available to them in the event of trial-related injuries.

Trial Participation

As per the G-EthicalEval, the application packet submitted to the EC must also include a statement regarding possible compensation for research subjects for their participation (including reimbursement of expenses and access to medical care), if not sufficiently described in the protocol.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

The G-EthicalEval indicates that the principal investigator (PI) must agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3). DRC-3 provides guidance for sponsors on clinical trial quality management.

Per DRC-3, the sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, focusing on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that includes:

During protocol development, identify processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results
Identify risks to critical trial processes and data
Evaluate the identified risks against existing risk controls
Decide which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept
Document quality management activities and communicate to those involved in or affected by these activities
Periodically review risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant
In the clinical study report, describe the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarize important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken
Monitoring Requirements

Per DRC-3, the sponsor should develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The extent and nature of monitoring is flexible and permits varied approaches that improve effectiveness and efficiency. The sponsor may choose on-site monitoring, a combination of on-site and centralized monitoring, or where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan).

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

The G-EthicalEval indicates that in the event of suspension or premature termination of a trial, the PI must inform the ethics committee (EC) of the reasons for the decision. A summary of the results up to that point must then be submitted to the EC.

According to DRC-3, if it is discovered that noncompliance significantly affects or has the potential to significantly affect participant protection or reliability of trial results, the sponsor should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions. Further, the EC should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

The G-EthicalEval indicates that the principal investigator (PI) must agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3). DRC-3 provides guidance for sponsors on clinical trial data and records management.

As per DRC-3, when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor must ensure that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. The sponsor should base their approach to validate such systems on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use and the potential of the system to affect participant protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, the sponsor should maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) for the systems that cover system setup, installation, and use. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the system users should be provided with training. Refer to DRC-3 for additional information.

Records Management

According to the G-EthicalEval, the research protocol should address monitoring, statistical data management and analysis, quality assurance, expected results and dissemination, and publication policy.

As set forth in DRC-3, sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application, until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications, or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of the investigational product’s clinical development. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed.

In addition, DRC-3 states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Responsible Parties

As per the DigiCode, the data controller is a natural or legal person, public authority, agency, or other body which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data. The representative of the data controller is a natural or legal person permanently established in the territory of the country, who replaces the data controller in fulfilling the obligations provided for in the DigiCode. Additionally, the data controller must appoint a data protection officer to ensure that any processing of personal data is not likely to infringe on the rights and freedoms of the data subjects. The data protection officer is responsible for ensuring, in an independent manner, the internal application of the provisions of the DigiCode, and for keeping a register of the processing carried out by the data controller.

Additionally, the DigiCode provides for the establishment of the Data Protection Authority (APD), which will be responsible for monitoring compliance with the DigiCode provisions related to the processing of public and personal data hosted in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). See the DigiCode for more information on the APD.

Data Protection

As stated in the DigiCode, personal data must be treated confidentially and protected, in particular when the processing involves transmissions of data over a network. The personal data must be kept in a form that permits identification of the persons concerned for a period not exceeding that necessary to achieve the purposes for which they are collected or for which they are processed. Personal data may be kept for longer periods to the extent that they will be processed exclusively for archival purposes in the public interest, for scientific or historical research purposes, or for statistical purposes, provided that the appropriate technical and organizational measures are implemented to guarantee the rights and freedoms of the person concerned. The personal data collected must be reliable, adequate, relevant, accurate, complete, and not excessive. All appropriate measures must be taken to ensure that data that is inaccurate or incomplete, in relation to the purposes for which it was collected or for which it is subsequently processed, is erased or rectified.

According to the DigiCode, the processing of personal data is subject to a prior declaration to the APD. The declaration, which includes an undertaking that the processing meets the requirements of the DigiCode, is made by the data controller or their representative. Additionally, the processing of personal data relating to genetic and medical data, as well as scientific research in these areas, requires prior authorization from the APD before any implementation. The intended transfer of personal data to a third country also requires prior authorization. The request for authorization is submitted by the data controller or their representative. See the DigiCode for more information on declarations and authorizations.

The DigiCode indicates that the request for declaration or authorization may be sent to the APD electronically, by post, or by any other means where the receipt is acknowledged by the APD. The APD will make a decision within 30 days of receipt of the request for declaration or authorization. This period may be extended once by 30 days upon reasoned decision of the APD. If the declaration or authorization requested from the APD is not made within the prescribed period, the silence of the APD will be deemed to be acceptance. In the event of refusal by the APD, the data controller may appeal within 15 days of notification of the refusal decision.

The DigiCode states that the processing of personal data is carried out within the framework of respect for human dignity, privacy, and public freedoms. The processing of personal data, whatever its origin or form, must not infringe the rights of persons protected by the laws and regulations in force and it is, in all cases, prohibited to use this data to harm persons or their reputation. Additionally, the personal data must be processed in a manner that ensures appropriate security, including protection against unauthorized or unlawful processing and against accidental loss, destruction, or damage, using appropriate technical or organizational measures.

See the DigiCode for more information on the responsibilities of the data controller and the data protection officer.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

The DigiCode indicates that the processing of personal data will be lawful only to the extent that the data subject has consented to the processing of their personal data or if the processing is necessary for the performance of a legal obligation to which the controller is subject. If the data subject is incapable of giving consent, consent is governed by the principle of common law.

Per the DigiCode, where processing is based on consent, the controller must be able to demonstrate that the data subject has given consent for the processing of their personal data. Where the data subject's consent is given in the context of a written statement which also concerns other matters, the request for consent must be completed in a form which clearly distinguishes it from these other matters, in a comprehensible and easily accessible manner, and formulated in clear and simple terms. The data subject has the right to withdraw consent at any time, by the same means used to give it. Withdrawal of consent will not affect the lawfulness of processing based on consent prior to its withdrawal. The data subject must be informed of this before giving consent. Withdrawal should be as simple as giving consent. When determining whether consent is freely given, the utmost regard should be given, among other things, to whether the performance of a contract (including the provision of a service) is subject to consent for personal data processing, but such processing is not necessary for the performance of that contract.

According to the DigiCode, the data subject may request from the controller:

Information allowing them to know and contest the processing of their personal data
Confirmation as to whether or not personal data concerning them are being processed, as well as information on the purposes of the processing; the categories of data to which it relates and the categories of recipients to whom the data is communicated; the recipients or categories of recipients to whom the personal data have been or will be communicated, where possible; and the existence of automated decision-making, including profiling, and, at least in those cases, meaningful information about the logic involved, as well as the significance and envisaged consequences of such processing for the data subject
The communication in intelligible form of personal data concerning them, as well as any available information as to the origin of such data
Where applicable, information relating to the transfers of personal data envisaged to a third party, after consultation with APD
Where possible, the envisaged period for which the personal data will be retained or, where this is not possible, the criteria used to determine that period
The existence of the right to request from the controller rectification or erasure of personal data, or restriction of processing of personal data concerning the data subject, or to object to such processing
The right to lodge a complaint with the competent authority
Any available information as to their source, where the personal data are not collected from the data subject
See the DigiCode for additional details on data subject rights.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Obtaining Consent

For any biomedical research involving humans in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), the investigator must obtain the free and informed consent of the prospective participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the G-EthicalEval, the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3), and the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10).

As per the G-EthicalEval and DRC-3, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by an ethics committee (EC). The G-EthicalEval further states that when reviewing the informed consent process, the EC should review the arrangements for receiving and responding to requests and complaints from research participants or their representatives during the course of a study. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.)

In addition, DRC-3 states that that the participant or legal representative/guardian must be provided with detailed research study information. None of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive their legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representatives from their liabilities for any negligence.

The G-EthicalEval indicates that in the process of obtaining informed consent, sponsors and investigators must refrain from unjustified deception, attempts to exert undue influence, or intimidation. The sponsor and investigator may solicit consent only after making sure that the potential participant understands the details of participation and has been given time to consider it.

Re-Consent

The G-EthicalEval indicates that when material changes occur in the modalities or procedures of a study, or periodically for long-term studies, the investigator must again seek the informed consent of the participants. Sponsors and investigators have a duty to obtain the informed consent of each participant in the event of a significant change in the terms and conditions of the research, or if new information emerges that may affect the willingness of the participants to continue. For example, new pieces of information may have emerged from the study or from other sources (other studies or pharmacovigilance) about the risks or benefits of the products being investigated or about products to replace them. If it changes the risk, then this information must be promptly communicated to the participants. However, the results of the study will be disclosed at the end of the research after analysis of the data.

The sponsor and investigator must also seek renewed informed consent for each participant in long-term studies at predetermined intervals, even if there is no change in the design or objectives of the research.

Language Requirements

The G-EthicalEval requires that the ICF be provided in the language(s) understood by potential participants and, if necessary, in other languages. The investigator must convey the information in the informed consent process, orally and in writing, in a language that corresponds with the level of understanding of the participant. The investigator should also consider that the participant’s ability to understand the information required to express informed consent depends on the maturity, comprehension ability, level of education, and belief system of the participant.

DRC-17 and AppAuthCTReqs specify that the ICF and assent form (if applicable) should be provided in French and the four (4) national languages.

Documenting Consent

According to the G-EthicalEval and DRC-3, the participant or legal representative/guardian must sign the ICF. The G-EthicalEval states that it is advisable to give participants information sheets to keep that may be similar to ICFs, but do not require a signature. The EC must approve the content of the informed consent material. When consent has been obtained orally, investigators are required to provide documentation or evidence of consent.

The G-EthicalEval indicates that if the participant is illiterate, an independent witness must sign the consent. DRC-3 further specifies that where the participant is illiterate or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. The witness should sign and date the ICF after the following steps have occurred:

The written ICF and any other written information to be provided to the participant is read and explained to the participant and legal representative/guardian
The participant and legal representative/guardian have orally consented to the participant’s involvement in the trial, and signed and dated the ICF, if capable of doing so
DRC-3 states that before participating in the study, the participant or legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF.

Waiver of Consent

The G-EthicalEval states that the EC may authorize, in extraordinary cases, the waiver of a signed consent form, such as in a case where the existence of a signed consent form would constitute an unreasonable threat to the privacy of the participant.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
The G-EthicalEval indicates that the principal investigator must agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3). DRC-3 provides guidance on the elements to include in the informed consent form (ICF) and states that information about the research study should be clearly presented in both written and oral form.

The G-EthicalEval and DRC-3 state that before seeking the consent of a person to participate in research, the investigator must indicate the following to the person using language or any other form of intelligible communication (Note: the sources provide overlapping and unique elements so each of the items listed below will not necessarily be in each):

That the person is invited to participate in the research as a subject, the reasons for which the person is eligible, and that participation is voluntary
That the person is free to refuse to participate and may at any time terminate participation without being penalized or losing any advantage to which the person would normally have been entitled
The purpose of the research and the procedures to be used by the investigator and the participant, and how the research departs from the usual medical care
For controlled trials, the modalities of the research (randomization, double-blind, etc.) and that the participant will only be informed of the assigned treatment once the study has been completed and the double-blind procedure has ended
The expected duration of participation (including the number and duration of visits to the research center and the resulting total duration) and the possibility of early termination of the trial or participation in the trial
Whether money or other types of material gratuity will be given in return for participation and, if so, their nature and amount
The anticipated expenses, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
That, after completion of the study, the participant will be informed of the findings of the research in general terms and will be individually informed of any findings regarding the participant’s personal health status
That the participant will be able to access, upon request, data concerning the participant even if these data have no immediate clinical utility
That the participant or legal representative/guardian will be informed in a timely manner if information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant's willingness to continue participation in the trial
All risks, pain, or discomfort foreseeable for the participant (or other persons) arising from participation in the research, including risks to the health or well-being of the spouse or partner of the participant
The reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant and, when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
Where appropriate, the direct benefits that the participant can expect from participation in the research
The expected benefits of research for the community or society, or the contributions of this research to scientific knowledge
If, when, and how any of the products or interventions that research has shown to be safe and effective will most likely be made available to the participant after ending participation in the research
Any intervention or alternative treatment currently available
That the monitor(s), the auditor(s), the ethics committee (EC), and the regulatory authority(ies) will be granted direct access to the participant's original medical records for verification of clinical trial procedures and/or data, without violating the confidentiality of the participant, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and regulations and that, by signing a written ICF, the participant or legal representative/guardian is authorizing such access
The arrangements that will be made to ensure the participant’s privacy and the confidentiality of the files where the participant is identified
The legal or other limitations of the investigators' ability to maintain confidentiality and the potential consequences of breaches of confidentiality
The rules applicable to the use of genetic test results and family genetic information, and the precautions taken to prevent the disclosure of genetic test results of a participant to the close family or to third parties without the participant’s consent
The proponents of the research, the institution to which the investigators report, and the nature and sources of funding for the research
Possible uses, direct or secondary, of the participant’s medical record and biological samples collected as part of clinical care
If it is anticipated that the biological samples taken from the research will be destroyed when the research is completed, and if not, a detailed description of how they will be preserved (where, how, for how long, and how it will be disposed of) and the future uses envisaged, and whether the participant has the right to decide on these future uses, to refuse the conservation, and to demand the destruction of the material in question
Whether commercial products can be derived from biological samples, and whether the participant will receive pecuniary or other benefits from the development of such products
If the investigator's sole function is to be an investigator, or both an investigator and the treating physician of the participant
The extent of the investigator's responsibility for providing medical benefits to the participant
That treatment will be provided free of charge for specified types of physical injury related to research or for research-related complications, the nature and duration of such treatment, the name of the organization or individual treatment, and if there are uncertainties about the funding of the treatment
How and by which organization the participant or family, or dependents of the participant, will be compensated for any disability or death resulting from such bodily injury (or, if applicable, that nothing is provided for this purpose)
That an EC has approved or authorized the research protocol (name and date)
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without the participant’s consent
Approximate number of participants involved in the study
The person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
The G-EthicalEval further indicates that this list is not exhaustive, and it is recommended to follow the latest edition of DRC-11, DRC-10, and DRC-3.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Overview

As delineated in the G-EthicalEval, a participant’s rights must be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process.

In addition, the G-EthicalEval states that the principal investigator (PI) should closely follow the guidelines provided by the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences’ (CIOMS) International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects (DRC-2).

(See the Required Elements, Vulnerable Populations, and Children/Minors sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.)

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the G-EthicalEval and DRC-3, the participant should be informed that participation is voluntary, and that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time without being penalized or losing any advantage to which the participant would normally have been entitled.

The Right to Information

As delineated in the G-EthicalEval and DRC-3, a potential research participant has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, and any potential benefits, risks, or constraints. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The G-EthicalEval further states that information collected during the study should be shared with the indigenous community in the research community. Researchers must consider community input and allow dissenting voices to speak in public if differences of opinion were not resolved earlier.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

According to the G-EthicalEval and DRC-3, the participant should be informed of arrangements that will be made to ensure the participant’s privacy and the confidentiality of the files where the participant is identified.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

DRC-3 states that the research participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries and/or to appeal against a violation of the participant’s rights. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The G-EthicalEval states that the PI is responsible for the well-being and integrity of the participants. In addition, the principles in DRC-3 state that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of the participant’s health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
According to the G-EthicalEval, the principal investigator must agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3). DRC-3 makes provisions to protect the rights of a research participant during the informed consent process when the procedure is complicated by emergencies.

Per DRC-3, in an emergency, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) has not been obtained from the research participant or legal representative/guardian, or if an effective treatment is lacking but the investigational product could address the participant’s emergency needs, the clinical trial may be conducted. However, the method used on the participant must be explained clearly in the trial protocol, and the ethics committee must approve the protocol in advance. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible, and consent to continue and other consent should be requested, as appropriate.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Overview

In all clinical trials in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process in accordance with the G-EthicalEval. Vulnerable populations, which have a limited ability to give informed consent, include children and adolescents, adults with serious mental or behavioral disorders, people with reduced levels of consciousness, pregnant women, prisoners, and socio-economically disadvantaged individuals. Research on these populations must be justified in detail, and efforts must be made to obtain the consent of the legal guardian(s) of these participants.

In addition, the G-EthicalEval requires principal investigators to work in accordance with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3). DRC-3 includes the following as vulnerable populations: members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students; subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel; employees of the pharmaceutical industry; members of the armed forces; and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable populations include persons in nursing homes, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.

See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Indigenous Peoples

According to the G-EthicalEval, special provisions must also be made for research related to the traditional or sacred knowledge of an indigenous community, or its members as indigenous people. The researcher should consult with community leaders and obtain their consent before approaching members individually. After obtaining the consent of the community, the researcher must still make sure to have the prior free and informed consent of each participant.

The G-EthicalEval further states that it is advisable to establish an informed consent process for communities and individual participants early in the research process or authorization, which should take into account the legitimate decision-making processes of communities at all stages of the process.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
According to the FamilyCodeMemo, the age of majority is 18 years old in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).

The G-EthicalEval recommends that children be included in the decision to participate in research based on their physical, psychological, and social developmental abilities. In addition, the G-EthicalEval requires principal investigators to work in accordance with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3), which states that when a clinical trial includes minors, the minors should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with their understanding and, if capable, should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

Assent Requirements

As per the G-EthicalEval, a child's ability to give informed assent to participate in research is globally established at the minimum age of 13. The research team should consider the complexity of the research and other aspects to raise this age, but never go below it. A minor’s parent/legal guardian must provide consent for the minor to participate in the research. Once the minor reaches the minimum age of 13, the minor must also give assent. It is therefore necessary to first obtain the consent of the parent/legal guardian, and then the assent of the child.

The G-EthicalEval further indicates that the refusal of the parent/legal guardian or child constitutes dissent and precludes the child's participation in the research.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
While G-EthicalEval lists pregnant women as a vulnerable population, there are no relevant provisions regarding any special consent procedures for pregnant women, fetuses, or neonates.

However, the G-EthicalEval requires principal investigators to work in accordance with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3), which states that the informed consent form should include a statement on the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
While G-EthicalEval lists prisoners as a vulnerable population, there are no relevant provisions regarding any special consent procedures for them.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
While G-EthicalEval lists adults with serious mental or behavioral disorders as a vulnerable population, there are no relevant provisions regarding any special consent procedures for them.

However, the G-EthicalEval requires principal investigators to work in accordance with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3), which states that when a clinical trial includes participants with mental impairment (e.g., those with severe dementia), the participants should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with their understanding and, if capable, they should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
As delineated in the G-PV and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3), an investigational product (IP) is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient being studied or used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes products already authorized but used or formulated and packaged in a different way from the authorized version, when used for an unauthorized indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

The G-EthicalEval indicates that the principal investigator must agree to work in accordance with DRC-3.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
As per D-ACOREP and DRC-15, the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention), in collaboration with the Ministry of Foreign Trade, is responsible for authorizing and controlling drug manufacture and imports in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).

The G-EthicalEval requires that the principal investigator agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3). DRC-3 requires investigational products (IPs) to be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP) and used in accordance with the approved protocol. Per DRC-17 and AppAuthCTReqs, a GMP certificate and/or evidence of GMP compliance must also be included in the clinical trial application to ACOREP.

According to DRC-12, an import license is required for the shipment of the IP to be used in the trial. The sponsor may apply for IP import approval through ACOREP’s Digital Platform (DRC-13).

Please note: DRC is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (DRC-1), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see DRC-7.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

The G-EthicalEval indicates that the principal investigator must agree to work in accordance with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3), which provides detailed Investigator’s Brochure (IB) requirements. DRC-3 specifies that the IB must contain all of the relevant information on the investigational product(s) (IP(s)) obtained through the earlier research phases, including preclinical, toxicological, safety, efficacy, and adverse event data. The sponsor should also update the IB as significant new information becomes available.

As specified in DRC-3, the IB must include the following sections:

Table of Contents
Summary
Introduction
Physical, Chemical, and Pharmaceutical Properties and Formulation
Nonclinical Studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects in Humans (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; and regulatory and post-marketing experiences)
Summary of Data and Guidance for the Investigator(s)
See DRC-3 for detailed content guidelines.

Quality Management

Per DRC-3, the sponsor must maintain a Certificate of Analysis to document the identity, purity, and strength of the IP(s) to be used in the clinical trial. DRC-17 and AppAuthCTReqs further add that, if applicable, a copy of the summary of product characteristics or of the certificate of pharmaceutical product for the IP must be included in the clinical trial application to the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention).

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
The G-EthicalEval requires that the principal investigator agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3). DRC-3 provides guidance on labeling of investigational products, stating that they should be coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable. Per DRC-17 and AppAuthCTReqs, labeling materials must be included in the clinical trial application to the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention).

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

The G-EthicalEval requires that the principal investigator agree to work in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11), the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3).

According to DRC-17, information on the shipping conditions for the investigational product (IP) and related materials must be included in the clinical trial application to the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (Autorité Congolaise de Réglementation Pharmaceutique (ACOREP)) of the Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention (Ministère de la Santé Publique, Hygiène et Prévention).

Per DRC-3, the sponsor must supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the IP(s). The sponsor should not supply either party with the IP(s) until the sponsor obtains all required documentation. The IPs must also be suitably packaged in a manner that will prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage. The sponsor must ensure the following:

IP product quality and stability over the period of use
IP manufactured according to any applicable Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP)
Proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP(s)
Records maintained for document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP(s)
Acceptable storage temperatures, conditions, and times for the IP(s)
Timely delivery of the IP(s)
Written procedures including instructions for handling and storage of the IP(s), adequate and safe receipt of the IP(s), dispensing of the IP(s), retrieval of unused IP(s), return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor, and disposal of unused IP(s) by the sponsor
Maintain sufficient quantities of the IP(s) to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary
Record Requirements

Per DRC-3, the sponsor should comply with the following records requirements:

Maintain records that document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP(s)
Maintain a system for retrieving IPs and documenting this retrieval (e.g., for deficient product recall, reclaim after trial completion, and expired product recovery)
Maintain a system for the disposition of unused IP(s) and for the documentation of this disposition
Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
In the G-EthicalEval, a specimen is referred to as a “biological sample.” The G-EthicalEval does not define biological samples, but indicates that they should be considered a loan made to the investigator, unless otherwise specified in the research agreement. This requirement is inspired by the philosophies of the Bantu community on “bodily integrity,” according to which every product and part of the human body is an essential and sacred component of the person. The investigator should therefore be considered the guardian of the samples, rather than the owner.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
Import/Export

In accordance with the G-EthicalEval, the transfer of data or biological samples to a third party requires the consent of the researcher, the participant concerned, and the community. If the data or biological samples are transferred abroad, the applicable authorities often need to be given the Materials Transfer Agreement.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 16, 2025
As per the G-EthicalEval, clinical trial participants must give consent for the use of biological samples for research purposes. Biological samples that are kept after the end of the research may only be used in a new study if the participant has given consent for its continued use. It may be necessary to find the participants to make them sign a specific consent of this new study. The records and biological samples of individuals who have specifically refused such uses in the past can only be used in public health emergencies with the approval of an ethics committee.

The G-EthicalEval indicates that the original consent process should include, as much as possible, a plan for future use of records or biological samples. When seeking informed consent, a member of the research team must interact with potential participants and seek their agreement on the following points:

Whether there will be or may be secondary use and, if so, whether this secondary use will be limited as to the type of study that may be conducted on such materials
The conditions under which investigators will be required to contact participants to obtain additional authorization for secondary use
The arrangements made by investigators, if necessary, to destroy records or samples or to erase personal identifiers
The rights of subjects to request the destruction or anonymization of biological samples, records, or certain items of records that they may consider particularly sensitive, such as photographs, videos, or audio recordings
The G-EthicalEval further states that before seeking the consent of a person to participate in research, the investigator must relay to the person the rules applicable to the use of genetic test results and family genetic information, and the precautions taken to prevent the disclosure of genetic test results of a participant without the participant’s consent.

In addition, per the G-EthicalEval, the transfer of data or biological samples to a third party requires the consent of the researcher, the participant concerned, and the community.

(See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent).

Requirements
(Legislation) Law No. 87-010 on the Family Code - Explanatory Memorandum (FamilyCodeMemo - French) (April 25, 2003)
Cabinet of the President of the Republic
(Legislation) Ordinance - Law N° 23/010 of March 13, 2023 Relating to the Digital Code (DigiCode - French) (English-DigiCode – Google Translation) (March 13, 2023)
Cabinet of the President of the Republic
(Regulation) Requirements for an Application for Authorization of a Clinical Trial No. 0485/ACRP/CAB/DG/D15/2025 (AppAuthCTReqs - French) (May 13, 2025)
Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Ethical Evaluation of Research Involving Human Subjects in the Democratic Republic of Congo (G-EthicalEval - French) (English-G-EthicalEval - Google Translation) (2011)
Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Guidelines on Pharmacovigilance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (G-PV - French) (English-G-PV - Google Translation) (October 2018)
Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine, Ministry of Health
(Circular) Circular Note No. 0349/ACRP/DG/P/2024 Concerning the Procedures for Collection of Authorization, Marketing, Importation and Quality Control Fees for Medicines for the Benefit of ACOPEP, Defined by Ministerial Order No. 1250/CAB/MIN/SPHP/CJ/2023/058 of November 16, 2023 (Circular0349 - French) (May 8, 2024)
Ministry of Health
(Decree) Decree No. 20/002 of 05 March 2020 on the Creation, Organization and Operation of a Public Establishment Called the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (ACOREP) (D-ACOREP - French) (English-D-ACOREP - Google Translation) (March 5, 2020)
Ministry of Health
(Order) Ministerial Order No. 1250/CAB/MIN/S/ZKM/043/MC/2006 of 18 December 2006 Establishing the National Committee on Health Ethics (CNES) (Order1250-ZKM043 - French) (December 18, 2006)
Ministry of Health
(Order) Ministerial Order No. 1250/CAB/MIN/SP/013/CPH/FBO/2015 of 28 September 2015 Amending and Supplementing Ministerial Order No. 1250/CAB/MJN/025/CJ/OMK/2009 on the Organization of the National System of Pharmacovigilance in the Democratic Republic of Congo (Order1250-SP013 - French) (September 28, 2015)
Ministry of Health
(Order) Ministerial Order No. 1250/CAB/MSPHP/058/CJ/OBK/2023 Establishing the Procedures for Authorization, Marketing, Importation and Quality Control Fees for Medicines for the Benefit of the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority, ACOREP (Order1250-MSPHP058 - French) (November 16, 2023)
Ministry of Health
Additional Resources
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (DRC-1) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (DRC-11) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (DRC-10) (Technical Report Series No. 850, Annex 3) (1995)
World Health Organization
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (DRC-3) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects (DRC-2) (2002)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with the University of Kinshasa (July 2022, August 2023) (DRC-12)
(Webpage) ACOREP - Contact Us (DRC-9 - French) (Current as of December 16, 2025)
Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) ACOREP – Clinical Trial (DRC-4 - French) (Current as of December 16, 2025)
Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) ACOREP – Directorate of Pharmacovigilance and the Fight Against Antimicrobial Resistance (DPER) (DRC-16 - French) (Current as of December 16, 2025)
Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) ACOREP – Import and Export Directorate (DRC-15 - French) (Current as of December 16, 2025)
Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) ACOREP Missions (DRC-6 - French) (Current as of December 16, 2025)
Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) Country Profile: Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC-7) (Current as of December 15, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) Digital Platform: Approval, Import & Export of Health Products (DRC-13) (Current as of December 16, 2025)
Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) Presentation of the Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (ACOREP) (DRC-5 - French) (Current as of December 16, 2025)
Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority
Forms
(Form) Clinical Trial Application Form No. 0570/ACRP/DG/CAB/D15/2025 (DRC-17 - French) (May 29, 2025)
Congolese Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Guinea
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
This message was updated on January 8, 2026
DNPM Website Update

As of April 2025, the ClinRegs team has been unable to access the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (Direction Nationale de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DNPM)) website (https://dnpm-msgn.com/). Please note that some of the links in the profile may not work, but we are monitoring the situation and will update the Guinea profile as appropriate.

Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Note: The DNPM website is currently inaccessible.

Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene (MSHP)

As delineated in PharmLaw-GIN, the Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene (Ministère de la Santé et de l'Hygiène Publique (MSHP)) is the regulatory authority responsible for national drug marketing authorization. Per DecreeNoD218, the MSHP is responsible for the regulation of clinical trials in the Republic of Guinea. Per GIN-1, the two (2) branches within the MSHP directly involved with the clinical trial approval process are the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d'Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)) and the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (Direction Nationale de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DNPM)). Per DecreeNoD218, CNERS is in charge of the clinical trial application review and approval process for studies conducted in humans, and per GIN-1, the DNPM is responsible for drug product registration, authorization, and importation.

National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (DNPM)

Per GIN-20, the DNPM’s mission is to develop and monitor the implementation of government policy in the area of pharmacy and medicine. The DNPM’s responsibilities associated with this mission are as follows:

Developing the elements of the drug and pharmacy policy
Monitoring the implementation of the policy at all levels of the country's health system
Developing regulatory texts relating to pharmacy and medicine
Organizing a rational and sustainable supply system for the supply of essential medicines for all health structures in the country
Organizing the quality control of drugs and biological products
Organizing and supervising pharmacovigilance to safeguard public health
Monitoring the application of international conventions on narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances
Developing information and continuing education documents for health professionals
Promoting essential research in the field of pharmacy and medicine
Per GIN-20 and GIN-9, to carry out its mission, the DNPM is comprised of two (2) divisions: the Medicines Division and the Division of Pharmaceutical Establishments & Laboratories.

As indicated in GIN-9, the Medicines Division’s responsibilities include managing the approval and import of drug products; overseeing drug economics including the supply and production of drug products; addressing pharmacovigilance and other vigilance activities; and monitoring narcotics and psychotropics on the national level. The Pharmaceutical Establishments and Laboratories Division’s responsibilities include overseeing regulations, standards, and approvals relating to pharmaceutical establishments and laboratories; managing the promotion and development of the pharmaceutical industry; addressing quality assurance and the fight against falsified medicines and illicit marketing; and implementing programs to address pharmaceutical logistics in Guinea. See GIN-9 for detailed division information.

National Ethics Committee for Health Research (CNERS)

For detailed information on CNERS’ responsibilities, composition, procedures, and fees, please refer to the Ethics Committee topic.

Other Considerations

According to GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7).

Please note: Guinea is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (GIN-3), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see GIN-10.

Contact Information

Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene (MSHP)

Per GIN-14, the following is the MSHP’s contact information:

Ministère de la Santé et de l’Hygiène Publique
Situé à Almamiya – Kaloum Conakry
République de Guinée

Telephone: +224 000 00 00 00
Email: contact@sante.gov.gn

National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (DNPM)

Per GIN-2, the following is the DNPM’s contact information:

Direction Nationale de la Pharmacie et du Médicament
Kaloun, Conakry
République de Guinée
Telephone: +224 627 00 00 00
Email: contact@dnpm-mshp.com

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Note: The DNPM website is currently inaccessible.

Overview

According to DecreeNoD218, Guinea-PHC, and GIN-5, the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d'Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)) must approve the health research protocol involving human participants before a clinical trial can commence. Furthermore, according to GIN-1, the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (Direction Nationale de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DNPM)) must issue a drug import license prior to the sponsor or the representative (typically the principal investigator (PI)) initiating the clinical trial.

According to GIN-1, CNERS must approve the clinical trial protocol before the drug import license application is submitted to the DNPM. Therefore, the CNERS and DNPM reviews may not be conducted in parallel.

Clinical Trial Review Process

According to GIN-1, the sponsor or the designated representative (typically the PI) is responsible for hand delivering the drug import license application to the DNPM’s Pharmacovigilance, Drugs and Quality Control section for review and approval. The DNPM may request drug samples for testing and evaluation even if the PI or the sponsor provides detailed proof of testing and licensing from regulatory authorities based abroad. Additionally, the DNPM may refuse to provide an import license even after CNERS’ approval of a clinical trial study. (See the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for submission requirements, and the Timeline of Review section for review timelines.)

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Note: The DNPM website is currently inaccessible.

National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (DNPM)

Per GIN-1, the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (Direction Nationale de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DNPM)) does not charge a fee to review the drug import license application. However, at times there may be related processes that the applicant must follow, which may include fees. Contact the DNPM for more information.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Overview

According to DecreeNoD218, Guinea-PHC, and GIN-5, the principal investigator (PI) must obtain ethics committee (EC) approval to conduct health research involving human participants from the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d'Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)) before a clinical trial can commence. As per DecreeNoD218, CNERS operates under the Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene (Ministère de la Santé et de l'Hygiène Publique (MSHP)). According to the Guinea-PHC and GIN-5, CNERS is responsible for reviewing and approving clinical research protocols for studies conducted in humans. Per GIN-13, CNERS is also responsible for ensuring research is conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Ethics for Health Research which have been incorporated into Guinea-PHC, for proposing amendments, and for examining ethical issues related to health research submitted by institutions or individuals. In addition to conducting research in compliance with the Guinea-PHC, per GIN-5, CNERS must also comply with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7), the Declaration of Helsinki (GIN-23), the Council for International Organizations of Medical Science (CIOMS)’ International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects (GIN-24), and the World Health Organization (WHO)’s Operational Guidelines for Ethics Committees that Review Biomedical Research (GIN-25).

Ethics Committee Composition

As specified in DecreeNoD218, CNERS consists of 17 members appointed by the MSHP Minister, including an executive office responsible for coordinating committee activities, ensuring its proper functioning, and holding regular meetings. The executive office is comprised of a president, a vice president, and two (2) secretaries. However, GIN-13 states that the executive office is comprised of five (5) members elected within CNERS: a president, a vice-president, a secretary general (held by the Section Head in charge of Research at the MSHP), a secretary in charge of following up on protocol implementation, and a treasurer. Committee members are selected for their interest in research ethics, and for their qualifications and experience in reviewing and evaluating the scientific, medical, and ethical aspects of proposed clinical trials. CNERS strives to bring together health professionals, as well as non-specialists, to represent the social strata and moral values of the national community, and may include doctors, epidemiologists, pharmacists, statisticians, public health specialists, representatives of ministries of health and justice, training and research institutions, religious denominations, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and patient associations.

As delineated in DecreeNoD218, CNERS composition specifically includes:

Two (2) members representing Guinea’s main religions (Islam and Christianity)
Eight (8) members with professional health research qualifications including doctors, clinicians, epidemiologists, biologists, chemists, statisticians, and methodology and research ethics experts
Seven (7) members representing organizations including health professional associations, relevant ministerial departments, research institutions, non-governmental organizations, and human rights organizations
Per GIN-13, the committee’s activities include the following:

Receive research protocols and correspondence for CNERS’s review
Manage the documentation and archives of CNERS
Help the committee prepare for its sessions
Write committee meeting minutes
Disseminate CNERS recommendations and decisions
CNERS has three (3) technical working committees: one (1) committee deals with advocacy, communication, and awareness actions; one (1) committee is responsible for training activities; and one (1) committee is responsible for monitoring and evaluating CNERS’s achievements.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

According to DecreeNoD218, the CNERS committee is required to follow standard operating procedures (SOPs) specifying the conditions for organizing and convening committee meetings and delineating member rights and responsibilities. See GIN-5 for the SOPs.

As specified in DecreeNoD218, the president (also known as the chairman) shall convene CNERS committee sessions, appoint rapporteurs to present the files/protocols submitted to the committee, and determine the matters to be discussed in the session. While DecreeNoD218 specifies that the CNERS committee meets in regular sessions two (2) times a year, the more current GIN-6 indicates that the committee meets in regular sessions on the last Thursday of each month. Per DecreeNoD218 and GIN-12, additional sessions are convened by the president as necessary.

GIN-6 indicates that applications submitted during the first week of each month will be discussed at the regular monthly meeting. It also explains that a minimum of three (3) weeks is required between the submission and its review by CNERS. The CNERS Administrative Assistant will provide the applicant with an acknowledgement of receipt and keep all files in the CNERS archives. GIN-12 states that committee members should have a copy of the protocol for review at least six (6) working days before the committee session.

DecreeNoD218 states that the appointment of CNERS committee members is valid for three (3) years and is renewable. Members must have no conflict of interest with the protocols under review. GIN-5 indicates that the quorum required for voting is nine (9) members. Per GIN-5, if necessary, CNERS may use independent consultants to provide specific expertise in reviewing the proposed research protocols. These consultants may be specialists in ethics, law, in a particular disease or methodology, or be representatives of specific communities, patients, or special interest groups. If necessary, CNERS can also invite the PI. Further, GIN-13 recommends changing one-third of the membership at a time, which helps to train new members and remain efficient during the transition.

For detailed CNERS procedures and information on other administrative processes, see DecreeNoD218 and GIN-5.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Note: The DNPM website is currently inaccessible.

Overview

According to DecreeNoD218, the Guinea-PHC, and GIN-5, the mission of the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d’Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)) is to ensure the scientific quality and ethical conduct of health research in the Republic of Guinea. As per the Guinea-PHC and GIN-5, the primary scope of information assessed by CNERS relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial. GIN-6 requires the principal investigator (PI) to respect the fundamental ethical principles of research involving human beings.

As per the Guinea-PHC and GIN-5, CNERS must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable. DecreeNoD218, the Guinea-PHC, and GIN-5 also state that CNERS is responsible for ensuring an independent, timely, and competent review of all ethical aspects of the clinical trial protocol. They must act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved by evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants, and they must verify the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards. See the Guinea-PHC and GIN-5 for detailed ethical review guidelines.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

As per the Guinea-PHC, GIN-6, and GIN-5, the PI or the representative is responsible for submitting a research application to CNERS for review and approval. According to GIN-1, CNERS must approve the clinical trial protocol before the sponsor or the representative (typically the PI) submits the drug import license application to the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (Direction Nationale de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DNPM)). Therefore, the CNERS and DNPM reviews may not be conducted in parallel.

GIN-6 and GIN-5 provide specific requirements for the submission of research by the PI, as well as the details pertaining to the CNERS review and decision-making process. Please refer to the Timeline of Review section for additional ethics committee (EC) timeline information.

Per GIN-5 and GIN-12, CNERS approval is valid for one (1) year and is renewable upon request by the PI/sponsor. Additionally, per GIN-12 and GIN-6, any amendments to protocols currently being implemented must also be submitted to CNERS.

Guinea-PHC states that when research is related to an epidemic or calamity, the proposal must be submitted within 30 days from the project’s filing date. GIN-5 further states that in emergencies (e.g., epidemics or disasters), an accelerated procedure is adopted without prejudice to the requirements of submitting the protocol and including the following:

Reduction of the minimum and maximum periods of review and decision to 48 hours and one (1) week respectively
Reduction of the required quorum of the members of CNERS to five (5)
Possibility of calling on other national and international experts
Acceptances of online submission and evaluation
Sending the response letter within 48 hours after evaluation
Per GIN-5, the EC should conduct a monitoring and evaluation visit for all approved research projects. Urgent follow-up visits may also be prompted by the following:

Any protocol amendment likely to affect the rights, safety, and/or well-being of the participants or the conduct of the research
Serious or unexpected adverse events related to the conduct of the research or the product tested
Actions taken by investigators, sponsors, and regulatory bodies
Any event or new information likely to modify the benefit/risk ratio of the research
A decision of an independent safety committee
Furthermore, in the event of serious shortcomings observed in the field (non-compliance with the protocol or modification of the latter), CNERS may suspend the implementation of the project. In this case, a new protocol will be submitted to CNERS for review.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
National Ethics Committee for Health Research (CNERS)

As per GIN-6, the principal investigator is responsible for paying a fee of 5,000,000 Guinean Francs to the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d’Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)) to review and approve the clinical trial protocol and related documents. For protocol amendments or extension of approval validation, the fee is 3,000,000 Guinean Francs. For doctoral students, the fee for amending a protocol or extending the validation of approval is 1,500,000 Guinean Francs.

Payment Instructions

Per GIN-17, payment to CNERS can be made by bank transfer, check, or cash depending on the options available to the applicant. GIN-5 further notes that when the investigator submits the documents to be examined to the CNERS secretariat, an acknowledgement of receipt and a payment receipt will be sent to the investigator.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Overview

Per DecreeNoD218, the Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene (Ministère de la Santé et de l’Hygiène Publique (MSHP)) is the authorizing body of the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d’Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)). CNERS is responsible for reviewing and approving clinical research protocols for studies conducted in humans at the national level.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

According to GIN-1, CNERS is accredited by the MSHP.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Note: The DNPM website is currently inaccessible.

Overview

In accordance with DecreeNoD218, Guinea-PHC, and GIN-5, the principal investigator (PI) must obtain approval to conduct health research involving human participants from the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d'Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)) before a clinical trial can commence. In addition, per GIN-1, the sponsor or the representative (typically the PI) is responsible for obtaining a drug import license from the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (Direction Nationale de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DNPM)) prior to initiating a study.

According to GIN-1, CNERS must approve the clinical trial protocol before the drug import license application is submitted to the DNPM. Therefore, the CNERS and DNPM reviews may not be conducted in parallel. Additionally, according to GIN-12 and GIN-6, any amendments to protocols currently being implemented must also be submitted to CNERS.

Regulatory Submission

According to GIN-1, the sponsor or the representative (typically the PI) should hand deliver one (1) hard copy of the drug import license application along with other required documentation to the DNPM’s Division of Pharmaceutical Products. (Refer to the Submission Content section for submission documentation information.)

Ethics Review Submission

As per GIN-6, eight (8) hard copies and an electronic copy of the clinical trial application and accompanying materials should be submitted to CNERS. The application and supporting materials text must be in Arial 12 font. Each hard copy must have all the materials bound together, and the electronic copy must be transmitted in a single file. See GIN-6 for the application form and the Submission Content section for detailed documentation requirements.

According to GIN-6, the clinical trial application and accompanying materials, must be provided in French.

Per GIN-6 and GIN-21, the CNERS application and all related documents must be submitted to the CNERS headquarters located within the Dixinn BlueZone, next to the Kenien bridge on the highway. Contact Ms. Diallo Aissatou BAH, by phone at +224 622 25 31 27 or +224 628 77 72 23, email: aissatou_dalaba07@yahoo.fr.

Please refer to the Ethics Committee section for more information regarding CNERS requirements.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Note: The DNPM website is currently inaccessible.

Regulatory Authority Requirements

Per GIN-1, the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (Direction Nationale de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DNPM)) does not have a drug import license application form. Rather, the application is comprised of the materials submitted by the sponsor or the representative (typically the principal investigator (PI)) along with a request to obtain a drug import license.

Per GIN-1, along with the application, the sponsor or the representative must submit the following:

One (1) copy of the protocol
Ethical approval
Informed consent form (ICF)
Investigator(s) curriculum vitaes (CVs)
Investigator’s Brochure (IB)
All investigational product (IP) documentation
Product license request
Ethics Committee Requirements

According to GIN-6, the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d’Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)) requires eight (8) hard copies and an electronic copy of each of the documents listed below:

Research protocol submission letter, dated and signed by the PI
Completed ethics review application form, dated and signed by the PI (see GIN-6)
Protocol
ICF and/or assent form
Data collection instruments
IB
Detailed project budget in Guinean francs
Profile of investigators in five (5) lines
CVs for all investigators (four (4) pages maximum per CV)
Previous related decisions from CNERS and/or other countries
Letters from associated partners
Other documents
In addition to the documents indicated by GIN-6, GIN-5 also states that CNERS requires the following documents:

Table of contents
Acronyms and abbreviations
Project summary in a maximum of 10 lines
Research problem, objectives, and hypotheses
Research sponsor(s) profile(s) and CV(s)
Methodology including sampling
Ethical considerations
Data collection tools (including material(s) used to inform and recruit participants (e.g., posters, messages, image boxes, etc.) dated and with a version number, and translated into the relevant languages according to the target population of the study)
Participant compensation mechanism as well as the benefits related to the research
Measures taken to mitigate research-related risks
Measures taken to ensure participant(s) compensation in the event of injury
Data analysis techniques and tools
Documents relating to free and informed consent including: description of the strategies for recruiting participants and obtaining consent; participant protection and data privacy measures; presentation of risks faced by individuals and communities
Methods for sharing results (including publications), data, and biological materials collected in Guinea and transferred outside
Involvement of health authorities and communities
Methods for sharing research benefits with research populations
Activities schedule
Bibliographic references
IB, if applicable, together with published data and a summary of product characteristics
Details of changes made to the protocol since the last notice was issued
Sponsor and PI declaration to respect ethical principles and standards
See GIN-6 for detailed requirements related to corrections, amendments, and renewal of approvals.

Clinical Protocol

As indicated in the Guinea-PHC, any clinical research protocol must contain the following elements:

Identity of the sponsor and investigator
Research objectives and hypotheses
Methodology
Calculation of the number of participants necessary, and inclusion/exclusion criteria
Method of data analysis
Criteria to decide end of study
Potential risks to participants
Ethical aspects
Informed consent procedures
See the Guinea-PHC for additional details regarding protocol elements.

In addition, per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7). Accordingly, GIN-7 requires the following protocol contents:

General information (protocol title, identifying number, and date; contact information for the sponsor, medical expert, investigator(s), trial site(s), qualified physician(s), and laboratory and/or institutions involved in the study)
Background information
Objectives and purpose
Trial design
Selection, withdrawal, and treatment of participants
Assessment of efficacy
Assessment of safety
A description of the statistical methods to be used in the trial
Direct access to source data and documents
Quality control and quality assurance
Ethical considerations
Data handling and recordkeeping
Publication policy
Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Note: The DNPM website is currently inaccessible.

Overview

According to GIN-1, the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d’Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)) must approve the clinical trial protocol before the drug import license application is submitted to the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (Direction Nationale de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DNPM)). Therefore, the CNERS and DNPM reviews may not be conducted in parallel.

Regulatory Authority Approval

According to GIN-1, the DNPM’s approval of a drug import license application typically takes two (2) weeks, but can take longer.

Ethics Committee Approval

Per the Guinea-PHC, CNERS must give its opinion on any research protocol submitted within a period not exceeding 60 days from the project’s filing date. GIN-5 and GIN-12 indicate that the sponsor or principal investigator (PI) who submitted the protocol will be notified of the opinion of CNERS within 10 days of the committee meeting via email.

GIN-5 specifies that the PI is required to submit a research protocol to CNERS at least 15 days prior to the committee meeting for the application to be reviewed during the current month. However, this period may be expedited for health emergency reasons. GIN-6 similarly indicates that a minimum of three (3) weeks is required between the submission and its review by CNERS. GIN-6 further states that applications submitted during the first week of each month will be discussed at the regular monthly meeting which occurs on the last Thursday of each month. GIN-5 explains that the file must include all required documents for it to be admissible and evaluated by the committee (See the Submission Content section for the list of required documents.)

Per GIN-6, the CNERS Administrative Assistant will provide the applicant an acknowledgement of receipt and keep all files in the CNERS archives. GIN-12 states that committee members should have a copy of the protocol for review at least six (6) working days before the committee session. Per the Guinea-PHC, CNERS must give its opinion on any research protocol submitted within a period not exceeding 60 days from the project’s filing date. GIN-5 and GIN-12 indicate that the sponsor or PI who submitted the protocol will be notified of the opinion of CNERS within 10 days of the committee meeting via email and that CNERS approval is valid for one (1) year and is renewable upon request by the PI/sponsor.

Special Circumstances

Guinea-PHC states that when research is related to an epidemic or calamity, the proposal must be submitted within 30 days from the project’s filing date. GIN-5 further states that in emergencies (e.g., epidemics or disasters), an accelerated procedure is adopted without prejudice for the protocol submission requirements and includes the following:

Reduction of the minimum and maximum periods of review and decision to 48 hours and one (1) week respectively
Reduction of the required quorum of CNERS members to five (5)
Possibility of calling on other national and international experts
Acceptance of online submissions and evaluations
Sending the response letter within 48 hours after evaluation
Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Note: The DNPM website is currently inaccessible.

Overview

In accordance with DecreeNoD218, Guinea-PHC, and GIN-5, the principal investigator (PI) must obtain approval to conduct health research involving human participants from the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d'Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)) before a clinical trial can commence. In addition, per GIN-1, the sponsor or the representative (typically the PI) is responsible for obtaining a license to import study drugs from the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (Direction Nationale de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DNPM)) prior to initiating a study. No waiting period is required following the sponsor’s receipt of these approvals.

Per GIN-17, the research should comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7).

Clinical Trial Agreement

Furthermore, per GIN-7, the sponsor should obtain the investigator’s/institution’s agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with Good Clinical Practice (GCP), the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and the approved protocol
Comply with procedures for data recording/reporting
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain the trial-related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution these documents are no longer needed
The sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement.

Clinical Trial Registration

According to GIN-1, the Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene (Ministère de la Santé et de l'Hygiène Publique (MSHP)) requires proof that the trial has been registered in a clinical trial registry.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Note: The DNPM website is currently inaccessible.

Safety Reporting Definitions

Per G-PV-GIN, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Guinea’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any harmful and unintended manifestation occurring in a subject during treatment. The term "adverse event", unlike "adverse effect", does not prejudge a causal link with exposure, particularly to a drug.
Adverse Reaction (AR) – A harmful and unintended reaction to a drug or other health product, occurring at dosages normally used in humans for the prophylaxis, diagnosis, or treatment of disease or for the recovery, rectification, or modification of a physiological function, or resulting from misuse of the drug or product
Adverse Drug Effect (ADR) – A harmful and unwanted reaction, occurring at dosages normally used in humans for the prophylaxis, diagnosis, or treatment of a disease or the modification of a physiological function or resulting from a misused drug, constituting a withdrawal syndrome when stopping the product or a dependency syndrome, as well as any reaction resulting from misuse. It also includes any harmful reactions that may arise from poor quality of the drug
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) – An adverse effect that is lethal, or likely to be life-threatening, resulting in disability or incapacity, or causing or prolonging hospitalization, or resulting in a congenital anomaly
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction – An adverse reaction whose nature, severity, or outcome does not correspond with the known authorized information for this medicinal product
As delineated in G-PV-GIN, Guinea’s pharmacovigilance system is coordinated by the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (Direction Nationale de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DNPM)) according to the provisions in PharmLaw-GIN. G-PV-GIN is based on the GIN-7 guidelines, and may also contain additional requirements in accordance with the legislation in force. The National Pharmacovigilance System includes the National Pharmacovigilance Commission, the National Pharmacovigilance Technical Committee, the Pharmacovigilance Section of the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine, the pharmacovigilance focal points at each level of the health pyramid, health programs, pharmaceutical companies, and the public. See G-PV-GIN for additional details).

Safety Reporting Requirements

As delineated in G-PV-GIN, pharmaceutical companies are required to notify the DNPM of SAEs/serious adverse drug reactions (SADRs) occurring during a clinical trial within seven (7) days. Additionally, the DNPM should be notified of any new fact likely to harm the safety of the participants participating in the trial 15 days following first knowledge of the sponsor. Non-serious AEs will be transmitted to the DNPM in the clinical study final report.

Per G-PV-GIN, clinical trial applicants are required to notify the DNPM of the following:

Any AE (including symptoms and clinical signs)
Changes in biological values (e.g., hypoglycaemia, etc.) or medication errors
Therapeutic failures
Drug interactions
Any observation of overdose, abuse, or misuse
Any problem related to exposure during pregnancy or breastfeeding
Any observation of loss of efficacy, in particular with vaccines, contraceptives, or other pharmaceutical products intended for the treatment of diseases involving life-threatening conditions
Any other effect deemed relevant to declare
G-PV-GIN specifies that all serious and unexpected AEs/ADRs that are fatal or life-threatening, as well as those occurring during a clinical trial, must be notified to the DNPM expeditiously, i.e., as soon as the notifier becomes aware of them or within a period not exceeding 48 hours. Update notes may be provided within an additional period not exceeding 7-15 days. All other serious or unexpected AEs/ADRs must be reported immediately, but within a period not exceeding seven (7) days. The count of days starts from the moment when the notifier becomes aware of the suspected AE/ADR and the minimum conditions for notification are met.

Per G-PV-GIN, the pharmaceutical industry must also report serious or unexpected AEs/ADRs within 24-48 hours, deaths within 24 hours, and non-serious AEs/ADRs monthly. Health professionals are required to report serious or unexpected AEs/ADRs within 24-48 hours, deaths are to be reported immediately, and non-serious AEs/ADRs should be reported as soon as possible, not to exceed seven (7) days.

Investigator Responsibilities

According to GIN-5, the principal investigator (PI) must report serious and unexpected AEs to the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d’Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)) for review.

According to GIN-17, CNERS does have an AE/ADR database, however, an electronic link is not available nor is any other information regarding the database at this time.

Ethics Committee Responsibilities

As indicated in GIN-5, the ethics committee should assess the AEs that have occurred, the measures taken for the participant’s safety, and the information from CNERS (pharmacovigilance file).

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

Per GIN-17, since CNERS has not yet developed a specific AE/ADR form, researchers should complete their own AE/ADR notification form and submit it to CNERS for review. Researchers submit completed AE/ADR notification forms to CNERS for review. No further information is available regarding delivery requirements.

G-PV-GIN notes all AE/ADR notifications are made on the national notification form designed by the DNPM. Refer to G-PV-GIN for form details.

In addition, per G-PV-GIN, Guinea also submits ADR notifications via the World Health Organization (WHO)’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre's VigiFlow database (GIN-16). See GIN-15 and GIN-19 for detailed information on VigiFlow.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

According to GIN-5, the principal investigator (PI) is responsible for submitting a progress report on the status of a clinical trial to be evaluated by the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d’Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)). In addition, per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7), which states the investigator should promptly provide written reports to the sponsor and the institutional ethics committee, and where applicable, the institution, on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to participants.

Final Report

Per GIN-5, the PI is responsible for submitting a final study report upon the trial’s completion to be evaluated by CNERS.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7), which defines a sponsor as an individual, company, institution, or organization that takes responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a clinical trial.

In accordance with GIN-7, Guinea permits a sponsor to transfer any or all of its trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO) and/or institutional site(s). However, the ultimate responsibility for the trial data’s quality and integrity always resides with the sponsor. Any trial-related responsibilities transferred to a CRO should be specified in a written agreement. The CRO should implement quality assurance and quality control.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Overview

Per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7), which provides guidance to sponsors on investigator and site selection. According to GIN-7:

The sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s)/institution(s). Each investigator should be qualified by training and experience and should have adequate resources to properly conduct the trial for which the investigator is selected. If the organization of a coordinating committee and/or selection of coordinating investigator(s) are to be utilized in multicenter trials, their organization and/or selection are the sponsor’s responsibility.
Before entering an agreement with an investigator/institution to conduct a trial, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the protocol and an up-to-date Investigator’s Brochure, and the investigator/institution should be provided with sufficient time to review the materials.
Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

No information is available regarding foreign sponsor regulatory requirements.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

Per GIN-7, a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) may be established to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial.

Multicenter Studies

As delineated in GIN-7, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor, and given ethics committee approval
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication among investigators is facilitated
In addition, the sponsor is responsible for the organization of a coordinating committee and/or selection of coordinating investigator(s), if they are to be utilized.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Insurance

According to GIN-17, sponsors must submit proof of insurance as part of the clinical trial application submission to the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d’Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)).

Compensation

Injury or Death

According to the Guinea-PHC, in the event of any temporary or permanent trial-related injury or disability, the participant should be compensated. In the case of the participant’s death, the legal heirs are entitled to financial compensation.

In addition, per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7), which provides guidance for sponsors on providing compensation to research participants in the event of trial-related injuries or death. The sponsor must explain to participants the compensation and/or treatment available to them in the event of trial-related injuries.

Trial Participation

Per GIN-7, the participant should be provided with information regarding any anticipated prorated payment, if any, for participating in the trial.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

Per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7), which provides guidance to sponsors on quality, data, and records management.

GIN-7 indicates that the sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, focusing on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that includes:

During protocol development, identifying processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results
Identifying risks to critical trial processes and data
Evaluating the identified risks against existing risk controls
Deciding which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept
Documenting quality management activities and communicating to those involved in or affected by these activities
Periodically reviewing risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant
Describing in the clinical study report, the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarizing important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken
Monitoring Requirements

Per GIN-7, the sponsor should develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The extent and nature of monitoring is flexible and permits varied approaches that improve effectiveness and efficiency. The sponsor may choose on-site monitoring, a combination of on-site and centralized monitoring, or where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan).

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

According to GIN-7, if it is discovered that noncompliance significantly affects or has the potential to significantly affect participant protection or reliability of trial results, the sponsor should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions. Further, the ethics committee (EC) should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Electronic Data Processing System

According to GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7). As per GIN-7, when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor must ensure that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. The sponsor should base their approach to validate such systems on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use and the potential of the system to affect participant protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, the sponsor should maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) for the systems that cover system setup, installation, and use. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the system users should be provided with training. Refer to GIN-7 for additional information.

Records Management

As set forth in GIN-7, sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application, until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications, or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of the investigational product’s clinical development. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed.

In addition, GIN-7 states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Responsible Parties

For the purposes of data protection requirements, the PDPLaw delineates the responsibilities of the “data controller.” The data controller, as defined by the PDPLaw, refers to the natural or legal person, public or private, or any other body or association which, alone or jointly with others, makes the decision to collect and process personal data, and determines the purposes thereof.

Data Protection

Per the PDPLaw, the data controller must be guided by the following principles:

The collection, recording, processing, storage, transmission, and interconnection of personal data files must be done in a lawful and fair manner
Personal data must be collected for specified, explicit, and legitimate purposes, and not be further processed in a manner incompatible with these purposes; be adequate, relevant, and not excessive regarding the purposes for which the data are collected and processed; be kept for a period that does not exceed the period necessary for the stated collection or processing purposes; data may only be kept beyond this required period to respond specifically to the process of said data for historical, statistical, or research purposes under the provisions of this law or any other laws or regulations in force regarding personal data protection
The data collected must be accurate, and if necessary, updated
The principle of transparency implies mandatory and clear information from the person responsible for processing personal data
Personal data must be treated confidentially and protected, in particular when the process of this data involves data transmissions in a network
When personal data processing is implemented on behalf of the data controller, the data controller must choose a subcontractor who is able to provide guarantees for the protection and confidentiality of the data
The person responsible for processing personal data may only be authorized to transfer said data to a third country if it ensures a higher or equivalent level of protection of the privacy, freedoms, and fundamental rights of persons regarding the processing to which these data are or may be subject; before any actual transfer of personal data to this third country, the data controller must obtain prior authorization from the Personal Data Protection Authority; any transfer of personal data to a third country is subject to strict and regular control by the Personal Data Protection Authority, regarding their purpose
As set forth in the PDPLaw, prior authorization from the competent authority (i.e., the Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene (Ministère de la Santé et de l’Hygiène Publique (MSHP)) is required before any implementation of personal data processing relating to:

Genetic and medical data and scientific research in these fields
Personal data including biometric data
Personal data processing for public interest reasons, in particular for historical, statistical, or scientific purposes
Planned transfer of personal data to a third country
See the PDPLaw for detailed information on data protection requirements in Guinea. Additionally, the AuthRatifPDP indicates that Guinea has ratified the African Union Convention on Cyber Security and Personal Data Protection (GIN-11). See GIN-11 for more information.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

As set forth in the PDPLaw, personal data processing is considered legitimate if the data subject expressly gives prior consent. However, this prior consent requirement may be waived when the controller is duly authorized and the processing is necessary for: compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller is subject; the performance of a task in the public interest or in the exercise of public authority, vested in the controller or the third party to whom the data is communicated; the execution of a contract to which the data subject is a party or for the execution of pre-contractual measures taken at the subject’s request; or to safeguard the interest or the fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject.

Per the PDPLaw, at the time of the data collection or before, the person responsible for processing personal data is required to provide the data subject the following information:

The specific purpose(s) of the processing for which the data is intended
The categories of data concerned
The recipient(s) to whom the data is likely to be communicated
The option of refusing to appear on the file in question
The existence of a right of access to data concerning the person, and a right to rectify this data
The data retention period
The possibility of any transfer of data to a third country
In addition, per the PDPLaw, the data subject may ask questions and obtain from the data processor the following:

Information allowing the person to know about and contest the processing
Confirmation that personal data concerning the data subject is or is not the subject of this processing
Information relating to the purposes of the processing, the categories of personal data processed and the recipients or categories of recipients to whom the data is communicated
Refer to the PDPLaw for detailed personal data protection consent requirements.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Obtaining Consent

In all Guinean clinical trials, a freely given informed consent must be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Guinea-PHC. According to GIN-5 and GIN-6, the informed consent form (ICF) must be reviewed and approved by the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d’Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)) with the clinical trial application. Per GIN-5, CNERS should also review modifications/amendments to the ICF and the assent form. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.)

Per the Guinea-PHC, investigator(s) must provide detailed research study information to the participant or legal representative/guardian. The ICF content should be presented in a manner that is easy to understand and without coercion or unduly influencing a potential participant to enroll in the clinical trial.

Per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7). As per the Guinea-PHC and GIN-7, a participant should not be coerced or pressured in any way during the consent process. Per GIN-7, none of the oral and written information concerning the trial, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or appear to waive any legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator, the institution, the sponsor, or their agents from liability for negligence.

Re-Consent

No information is currently available regarding re-consent requirements.

Language Requirements

According to GIN-6, the clinical trial application and accompanying materials, including the ICF, must be provided in French.

Documenting Consent

As indicated in the Guinea-PHC, the participant or legal representative/guardian must sign and date the ICF before an independent witness.

Per GIN-7, when the participant is illiterate or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. The witness should sign and date the ICF after the following steps have occurred:

The written ICF and any other written information to be provided to the participant is read and explained to the participant or legal representative/ guardian
The participant or legal representative/guardian have orally consented to the participant’s involvement in the trial, and has signed and dated the ICF, if capable of doing so
Before participating in the study, the participant or legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF.

Waiver of Consent

No information is available on waiver of consent requirements.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7), which provides guidance on the elements to include in the informed consent form (ICF). As described in GIN-7, both the informed consent discussion and the written ICF and any other written information to be provided to participants should include explanations of the following:

The trial involves research
The purpose of the trial
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
The trial procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The participant’s responsibilities
Those aspects of the trial that are experimental
The reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant and, when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
The reasonably expected benefits. When there is no intended clinical benefit to the participant, the participant should be made aware of this.
The alternative procedure(s) or course(s) of treatment that may be available to the participant, and their important potential benefits and risks
The compensation and/or treatment available to the participant in the event of a trial-related injury
The anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
The anticipated expenses, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
The participant’s participation in the trial is voluntary and the participant may refuse to participate or withdraw from the trial, at any time, without penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled
The monitor(s), the auditor(s), the ethics committee, and the regulatory authority(ies) will be granted direct access to the participant's original medical records for verification of clinical trial procedures and/or data, without violating the confidentiality of the participant, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and regulations and that, by signing a written ICF, the participant or legal representative/guardian is authorizing such access
The records identifying the participant will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and/or regulations, will not be made publicly available. If the results of the trial are published, then the participant’s identity will remain confidential
The participant or legal representative/guardian will be informed in a timely manner if information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial
The person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
The foreseeable circumstances and/or reasons under which the participant’s participation in the trial may be terminated
The expected duration of the participant’s participation in the trial
The approximate number of participants involved in the trial
Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Overview

In accordance with the Guinea-PHC, Guinea’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. The Guinea-PHC states that a participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process. GIN-6 requires the principal investigator to respect the fundamental ethical principles of research involving human beings.

Per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7).

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the Guinea-PHC and GIN-7, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary and that the participant may refuse to participate or withdraw from the research study at any time.

The Right to Information

As delineated in the Guinea-PHC and GIN-7, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, study procedures, obligations associated with the participant’s participation, any potential benefits or risks, and any compensation for participation or injury/treatment.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per the Guinea-PHC and GIN-7, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

No information is currently available regarding the right of inquiry/appeal.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The Guinea-PHC and GIN-7 state that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of the participant’s health and welfare must always take precedence over the interests of science and society.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
The Guinea-PHC makes provisions to protect the rights of a research participant during the informed consent process when the procedure is complicated by an emergency. As delineated in the Guinea-PHC, in an emergency, when the participant is unable to give informed consent, the consent of a family member should be obtained.

According to GIN-17, Guinea is also required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7). Per GIN-7, in an emergency, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) has not been obtained from the research participant or legal representative/guardian, or if an effective treatment is lacking but the investigational product could address the participant’s emergency needs, the clinical trial may be conducted. However, the method used on the participant must be explained clearly in the trial protocol, and the ethics committee must approve the protocol in advance. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible, and consent to continue and other consent should be requested, as appropriate.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Overview

As per the Guinea-PHC, in all Guinean clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. Vulnerable populations include persons who cannot give a fully free and informed consent because of the person’s situation or mental state, and may include, but are not limited to, children/minors, prisoners, physically or mentally handicapped, persons whose condition requires emergency treatment or life support, and pregnant or lactating women.

Per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7). GIN-7 includes the following as vulnerable populations: members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable populations include persons in nursing homes, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
In the ChildCode-GIN, a child is defined as any human being under the age of 18.

As stated in the ChildCode-GIN, the physical integrity of a child may only be infringed upon in cases of medical necessity for the child. The consent of a child with the capacity to discern must be obtained beforehand, except in cases where the child’s condition necessitates therapeutic intervention to which they are unable to consent. Anyone who carries out, or causes to be carried out, biomedical research on a child without having obtained the free, informed, and express consent of the child, the parent/legal guardian, or authorities/bodies empowered to consent to the research or to authorize it, will be penalized under Guinean Law. The same penalties apply when biomedical research is carried out after consent has been withdrawn. See the ChildCode-GIN for additional details.

In accordance with the Guinea-PHC, when the research participant is a child, the informed consent form (ICF) must be signed by the child’s parent/legal guardian. In the case of disagreement between the wishes of the child and the parent/legal guardian, the child’s wishes should prevail. The child’s personal consent must be requested when the child’s age allows the child to understand the purpose of the research, the risk, and disadvantages of this research, and what is expected of the child’s participation. Research may only be conducted in children if it cannot be conducted in less vulnerable participants, such as for the purpose of researching childhood diseases or pathologies to which children are particularly susceptible.

Per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7). GIN-7 states that when a clinical trial includes minors, the minor should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with their understanding and, if capable, should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

Assent Requirements

No information is currently available regarding assent requirements.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
As per the Guinea-PHC, any research studies involving women who are pregnant or nursing require additional safeguards to ensure the research conforms to appropriate ethical standards. The informed consent of the pregnant woman or nursing mother is required for all proposed research studies. Studies to be conducted with this population should meet one (1) or more of the following conditions:

The research should improve the health of the mother without harming the fetus or infant
The research should increase the viability of the fetus
The research should promote the proper development of the infant or the mother’s ability to nurse the infant
The Guinea-PHC further states that any research promoting abortion is prohibited by the Penal Code.

Per GIN-17, Guinea is also required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7). GIN-7 explains that the informed consent form should include a statement on the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
According to the Guinea-PHC, prisoners are considered vulnerable because incarceration could affect their ability to make a voluntary decision regarding participation in research. The Guinea-PHC states that prisoners may not participate in any research study while they are detained in prison and deprived of their freedom. Additionally, if an ill person is placed under the responsibility of the judicial authority, the agreement of the latter is required in addition to the informed consent of the participant.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
As stated in the Guinea-PHC, participants with a mental impairment are at risk in research studies as they are unable to fully comprehend the nature of the research and the informed consent process. Per the Guinea-PHC, mentally impaired participants should be fully informed about the study in which they have been asked to participate. Informed consent must be obtained from the legal representative/guardian who have been informed about the trial. The refusal of a mentally impaired participant should always be respected. Research may only be conducted in mentally impaired participants if it cannot be conducted in healthy participants.

Per GIN-17, Guinea is also required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7). GIN-7 states that when a clinical trial includes participants with mental impairment (e.g., those with severe dementia), the participant should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with their understanding and, if capable, should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7). GIN-7 defines an investigational product as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial, including a product with a marketing authorization when used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a way different from the approved form, or when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Note: The DNPM website is currently inaccessible.

Manufacturing

According to GIN-1, the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (Direction Nationale de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DNPM)) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of drug products, including investigational products (IPs), in Guinea. Specific information concerning the DNPM’s role in reviewing and approving the manufacture of IPs is not currently available.

Per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7), which requires IPs to be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) and used in accordance with the approved protocol.

Import

According to GIN-1, once the principal investigator (PI) obtains ethics committee approval from the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d'Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)), the sponsor or the representative (typically the PI) must submit a written request along with additional documentation to the DNPM director to obtain approval to import IPs. (See the Submission Content section for detailed documentation requirements.) According to GIN-1, the DNPM’s approval of a drug import license application typically takes two (2) weeks, but can take longer.

Additional information on the DNPM review and approval process is not available at this time.

Please note: Guinea is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (GIN-3), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see GIN-10.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Investigator’s Brochure

Per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7).

As specified in GIN-7, the Investigator’s Brochure (IB) must include the following sections:

Table of Contents
Summary
Introduction
Physical, Chemical, and Pharmaceutical Properties and Formulation
Nonclinical Studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects in Humans (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; and regulatory and post-marketing experiences)
Summary of Data and Guidance for the Investigator(s)
The sponsor should also update the IB as significant new information becomes available. See GIN-7 for detailed content guidelines.

Quality Management

Per GIN-7, the sponsor must maintain a Certificate of Analysis to document the identity, purity, and strength of the IP(s) to be used in the clinical trial.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Per GIN-17, Guinea is required to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7), which states that the investigational product (IP) must be coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable. The IPs must also be suitably packaged in a manner that will prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

According to GIN-7, the sponsor must supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the investigational products (IPs), including the comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable. The sponsor or the representative (typically the principal investigator (PI)) should not supply either party with the IP(s) until regulatory and ethics approval is obtained.

In addition, GIN-7 specifies that the sponsor must ensure the following:

Timely delivery of the IP(s)
Records maintained for IP document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction
Written procedures including instructions for handling and storage of the IP(s), adequate and safe receipt of the IP(s), dispensing of the IP(s), retrieval of unused IP(s), return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor, and disposal of unused IP(s) by the sponsor
IP product quality and stability over the period of use
Maintain sufficient quantities of the IP(s) to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary
IP manufactured according to any applicable Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP)
Proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP(s)
Acceptable IP handling and storage conditions and shelf-life
Record Requirements

As per GIN-7, the sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and institution(s) in writing of the need for record retention and should notify the investigator(s) and institution(s) in writing when the trial related records are no longer needed. Additionally, the sponsor must ensure sufficient quantities of the IP(s) used in the trial to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary, and should maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics.

All sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained for at least two (2) years after formal discontinuation of the trial or in conformance with applicable regulatory requirements.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
The Guinea-PHC and GIN-5 refer to specimens as biological materials.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
Import

No information is available regarding specimen imports.

Export

GIN-5 states that the applicant must provide the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d'Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)) with information on the methods used to export biological materials from Guinea. CNERS must evaluate the proposed methods of conservation and transfer to determine whether they are well described and appropriate.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 8, 2026
The Guinea-PHC states that the requirement for consent for research done on biological samples may be waived if it is impossible to locate the donor. However, approval must be granted by the National Ethics Committee for Health Research (Comité National d'Ethique pour la Recherche en Santé (CNERS)).

Requirements
(Legislation) Code of Public Health (Guinea-PHC - French) (English-Guinea-PHC - Google Translation) (June 19, 1997)
The National Assembly
(Legislation) Law L/2016/037/AN Relating to Cybersecurity and the Protection of Personal Data in the Republic of Guinea (PDPLaw - French) (July 28, 2016)
The National Assembly
(Legislation) National Assembly Law L/2017/No. 0023/AN Authorizing the Ratification of the African Union Convention on Cybersecurity and Personal Data Protection (AuthRatifPDP - French) (Effective June 16, 2017)
The National Assembly
(Legislation) Ordinary Law No. L/2018/024/AN Relating to Medicines, Health Products and the Practice of the Pharmacist Profession (PharmLaw-GIN - French) (June 20, 2018)
The National Assembly
(Legislation) Ordinary Law No. L/2019/0059/AN Establishing the Child Code of the Republic of Guinea (ChildCode-GIN - French) (December 30, 2019)
The National Assembly
(Regulation) Decree No. D/218/PRG/SGG: On the Establishment, Functions and Organization of the National Ethics Committee for Research in Health (CNERS) (DecreeNoD218 - French) (October 29, 1998)
National Assembly
(Guidance) Pharmacovigilance Guidelines (G-PV-GIN - French) (English-G-PV-GIN – Google Translation) (2023)
National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine
Additional Resources
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (GIN-3) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) Standardized Operating Procedure (SOP) for Reviewing a Health Research Protocol (GIN-5 - French) (English-GIN-5 - Google Translation) (Version 6.0) (February 2021)
National Ethics Committee for Research in Health (CNERS)
(International Guidance) African Union Convention on Cyber Security and Personal Data Protection (GIN-11) (Ratified July 31, 2018)
African Union
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (GIN-23) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GIN-7) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) International Ethical Guidelines for Health-Related Research Involving Humans (GIN-24) (2016)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS)
(International Guidance) Operational Guidelines for Ethics Committees that Review Biomedical Research (GIN-25) (2000)
World Health Organization
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with Centre National de Formation et de Recherche en Santé Rurale de Maferinyah (December 2025) (GIN-1)
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with National Ethics Committee for Research in Health (CNERS) (December 2025) (GIN-17)
(Webpage) CNERS - FAQ (GIN-12 - French) (Current as of January 8, 2026)
National Ethics Committee for Research in Health
(Webpage) CNERS - Submission (GIN-21 - French) (Current as of January 8, 2026)
National Ethics Committee for Research in Health
(Webpage) CNERS - Who We Are (GIN-13 - French) (Current as of January 8, 2026)
National Ethics Committee for Research in Health
(Webpage) Collect Your Data with VigiFlow (GIN-15) (Last Updated November 6, 2025)
Uppsala Monitoring Centre, World Health Organization
(Webpage) Country Profile: Guinea (GIN-10) (Current as of January 8, 2026)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) DNPM - Organization & Operation (GIN-9 - French) (Current as of November 13, 2024)
National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine
(Webpage) DNPM - Responsibilities (GIN-20 - French) (Current as of November 13, 2024)
National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine
(Webpage) MSHP - Contact Us (GIN-14 - French) (Current as of January 8, 2026)
Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene
(Webpage) National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (DNPM) (GIN-2 - French) (Current as of November 13, 2024)
National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine
(Webpage) VigiFlow Login (GIN-16) (Current as of January 8, 2026)
Uppsala Monitoring Centre, World Health Organization
(Webpage) VigiFlow Product Support (GIN-19) (Last Updated September 2025)
Uppsala Monitoring Centre, World Health Organization
Forms
(Form) Application Form for the Ethical Evaluation of a Research Project (GIN-6 - French) (English-GIN-6 - Google Translation) (Version 8) (January 2024)
National Ethics Committee for Research in Health (CNERS)
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

India
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
This message was reviewed on December 29, 2025
Information Not Yet Incorporated Into Country Profile:

Digital Personal Data Protection Rules Published

On November 14, 2025, India’s Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) issued the Digital Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025, bringing the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (DPDP Act) into effect. See MeitY’s Digital Personal Data Protection Rules 2025 page for supplemental sources related to the DPDP Act enforcement timeline and the Data Protection Board of India. Also see the MeitY press release announcing the DPDP Rules.

SUGAM Portal Updates 

The SUGAM Portal (https://cdscoonline.gov.in) is not accessible outside of India.

The Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI) has issued the following notice related to regulatory submissions through the SUGAM Portal:

Notice from October 27, 2025 - Post Approval Changes for Clinical Trials (Form CT-06) For Form CТ-04 for Cell and Gene Therapeutics Products (CGTP); the notice states that the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) will no longer accept offline submissions of CGTP clinical trial applications after October 24, 2025
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization

As set forth in the 2019-CTRules and the Hdbk-ClinTrial, the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial oversight, approval, and inspections in India. In accordance with the provisions of the 2019-CTRules, the Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI) heads CDSCO, and is responsible for granting permission for clinical trials to be conducted and for regulating the sale and importation of drugs for use in clinical trials. (Note: The DCGI is commonly referred to as the Central Licensing Authority in the Indian regulations.)

According to IND-80, CDSCO functions under the Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS), which is part of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW). Per IND-80 and IND-79, under the 2019-CTRules, CDSCO is responsible for approving new drugs and clinical trials, establishing drug standards, overseeing the quality of imported drugs, providing expert advice, and coordinating the state licensing authorities who regulate the manufacture, sale, and distribution of drugs. CDSCO, along with state regulators, is also jointly responsible for granting licenses of specialized categories of critical drugs (e.g., blood and blood products, IV fluids, vaccines, and sera).

In addition, per the DCA-DCR, the Drugs Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) and the Drug Consultative Committee (DCC) advise the DCGI. IND-16 states that the DTAB, a statutory board, is composed of technical experts who advise the central and state governments on technical drug matters and on making rules. The DCC, a statutory committee, consists of central and state drug control officials who advise the central and state governments and the DTAB to ensure drug control measures are enforced throughout India.

Also, per the G-SECs, Subject Expert Committees (SECs) provide specialized expertise and advice to CDSCO in the evaluation of proposals related to new drugs, clinical trials, and new investigational medical devices for regulatory approvals. As indicated in the G-SECs and the Hdbk-ClinTrial, SECs comprise experts representing the relevant therapeutic areas, and per the G-SECs, SEC experts evaluate animal study, pre-clinical, and clinical data along with the study protocol to determine safety, efficacy, and rationality of new drugs and investigational medical devices. In addition to providing comprehensive scientific evaluations, the G-SECs notes that SECs provide expert advice and guidance to applicants on protocol and data generation in accordance with regulatory provisions and applicable guidelines to enhance the quality of clinical trials and applications. The 2019-CTRules and Order13Jan20 further note that the DCGI may, when required, constitute one (1) or more of these expert committees or group of experts with specialization in relevant fields to evaluate scientific and technical drug-related issues. In accordance with the 2019-CTRules and with the approval of the MOHFW, Order13Jan20 establishes the terms of reference that CDSCO will use to constitute the SECs from the groups/panels of approximately 550 medical experts with specialization in relevant fields, including the existing members of the SECs from various government medical colleges and institutions. Additionally, per Notice31Jan24, CDSCO’s SEC Division is responsible for conducting meetings to evaluate IND proposal submissions. See the G-SECs for detailed information on SECs. Refer to Scope of Assessment section for information on the SEC’s role in clinical trial application reviews.

Please note: India is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (IND-29), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see IND-45.

Contact Information

According to IND-58 and IND-80, the CDSCO contact information is as follows:

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS)
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Government of India
FDA Bhavan, ITO, Kotla Road
New Delhi 110002
India
Phone: +91-11-23216367 or +91-11-23236973
E-mail: dci@nic.in

Sugam Helpdesk
Phone: +91-11-23502918
E-mail: helpdesk.sugam@cdsco.nic.in

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the 2019-CTRules and the Hdbk-ClinTrial, the Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), who heads the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO), is responsible for reviewing and approving clinical trial applications for new drugs, investigational new drugs (INDs), and imported drugs to be registered in India. Per the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and IND-31, the DCGI and a DCGI-registered ethics committee (EC) must approve a clinical trial application prior to the sponsor (applicant) initiating the trial, except in the case of non-regulatory academic clinical trials that only require EC approval.

IND-31 further states that the DCGI review and approval process may be conducted in parallel with the institutional or independent EC review for each clinical trial site. However, per the 2019-CTRules and the Hdbk-ClinTrial, CDSCO must confirm that the EC approvals for each participating site have been obtained per the protocol prior to approving the initiation of the study.

See the Scope of Review section for more information on academic clinical trial requirements and other ethical review processes.

As per the 2019-CTRules and the Hdbk-ClinTrial, the scope of the DCGI assessment includes a review of applications for IND and new drug clinical trials, global clinical trials (GCTs), and post marketing studies (Phases I-IV). Per Notice18Feb20, which clarifies information provided in IND-31, the 2019-CTRules are only applicable to new drugs and INDs. (Note: the Hdbk-ClinTrial has not yet been updated to fully align with the 2019-CTRules.)

The 2019-CTRules defines a “new drug” as:

A drug, including active pharmaceutical ingredients or phytopharmaceutical drugs, that has not been used in the country to any significant extent
A drug that has already been approved by the DCGI and is now proposed to be marketed with modified or new claims
A fixed dose combination of two (2) or more drugs, individually approved for earlier specific claims, and which are now proposed to be combined for the first time in a fixed ratio, or, if the ratio of ingredients in an already marketed combination is proposed to be changed
A modified or sustained release form of a drug, or novel drug delivery system of any drug approved by the DCGI
A vaccine, recombinant Deoxyribonucleic Acid (r-DNA)-derived product, living modified organism, monoclonal antibody, cell, or stem cell derived product, gene therapeutic product, or xenografts intended to be used as a drug
Per the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, the above listed drugs, excluding the modified/sustained drug forms and biological drug products, will be deemed new for four (4) years from the date of first approval. The modified/sustained drug forms and biological products including vaccines should always be viewed as new drugs. The 2019-CTRules defines an IND as a new chemical or biological entity or a product having therapeutic indication but that has never been tested on human beings, and as also noted in IND-31, has not been approved as a drug for marketing in any country.

Clinical Trial Review Process

As set forth in the 2019-CTRules and the Hdbk-ClinTrial, the DCGI is responsible for reviewing and approving clinical drug applications. The evaluation timeline is dependent upon whether the investigational drugs under review are developed outside India, or discovered, researched, and manufactured in India. (Refer to the Timeline of Review section for detailed CDSCO timeline information.)

Per the Hdbk-ClinTrial and the G-SECs, a CDSCO official is responsible for conducting the initial administrative review. Per the Hdbk-ClinTrial, if the application is deemed complete, the official forwards the application along with a summary of the evaluation and a statement referring the proposal to a Subject Expert Committee (SEC) for further technical review. However, the G-SECs specifies that, if required, the application is referred to the relevant SEC for expert evaluation. According to the G-SECs, while most applications of new drugs, biological products, and new investigational medical devices necessitate SEC evaluation, certain categories may not require SEC intervention. These typically include routine post-approval changes, administrative changes, minor clinical trial/bioavailability/bioequivalence protocols, and discontinuation or withdrawal of clinical trials.

The Hdbk-ClinTrial further indicates that if the proposal is not accepted by the SEC, the sponsor may request additional consideration of the proposal by the Technical Committee. Otherwise, only the SEC’s recommendations are required for the DCGI (CDSCO) to issue a final decision to the Technical or Apex Committee. The G-SECs also notes that the SEC provides recommendations to CDSCO, which may include approval, rejection, or conditional approval along with specific requirements for further deliberation with additional data and the rationale for the recommendation. CDSCO then makes a final decision based on the SEC’s recommendation and other regulatory considerations. Additionally, per Notice31Jan24, CDSCO’s SEC Division is responsible for conducting meetings to evaluate IND proposal submissions. See the Submission Process section for CDSCO submission requirements.

Per the Hdbk-ClinTrial, SECs are usually comprised of six (6) experts representing various therapeutic areas, including pharmacologists/clinical pharmacologists, and medical specialists. However, Order13Jan20, issued in accordance with the 2019-CTRules, amended the SEC composition to eight (8) medical experts, specifically one (1) pharmacologist and seven (7) medical specialists. The G-SECs also indicates that SECs are comprised of eight (8) experts (one (1) pharmacologist and seven (7) specialists). A minimum of four (4) members should be present during meetings, including one (1) pharmacologist, to meet the quorum requirements. In the case of vaccines, the quorum should include a pediatrician and an immunologist.

Per the Hdbk-ClinTrial, SECs are responsible for advising CDSCO with in-depth evaluations of non-clinical data (including pharmacological and toxicological data) and clinical trial data (Phases I-IV) provided by the sponsors for approval. The 2019-CTRules further notes that the DCGI may, when required, constitute one (1) or more of these expert committees or group of experts with specialization in relevant fields to evaluate scientific and technical drug-related issues.

Additionally, per Order13Jan20 and the G-SECs, SECs evaluate and advise the DCGI on proposals in various categories for the approval of new drug and clinical trial applications. These include the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements): new drug substances of chemical and biological origin including vaccines and r-DNA derived products; subsequent approval of new drug and biological products including vaccines and r-DNA derived products already approved in the country; global clinical trials; fixed dose combinations of two (2) or more drugs to be introduced for the first time in the country; causality analysis, drug safety, or any other technical matter requiring expert advice by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW) or the DCGI. See Order13Jan20 and the G-SECs for the complete terms of reference required to constitute SECs.

Once an SEC has completed its review, the Hdbk-ClinTrial indicates that the committee sends its comments via email to CDSCO. CDSCO will then compile any written SEC comments requiring sponsor clarification or modification and sends this feedback to the sponsor. The sponsor must submit a written reply to CDSCO, which is also sent to the SEC for review. Following receipt of the sponsor’s response, the DCGI (CDSCO) will issue a final decision by official communication (permission, rejection, or resubmission) to the Technical or Apex Committee. Per the Hdbk-ClinTrial and the G-SECs, in the case of a sponsor’s request for reconsideration, CDSCO will review the resubmitted application and send it to the SEC again, or, to the Technical Committee per the sponsor’s request. Following the SEC’s review, the DCGI (CDSCO) will send a final decision to the Technical or Apex Committee. If CDSCO rejects the reconsideration request, the agency will send a letter to the sponsor to communicate this decision. Refer to the Hdbk-ClinTrial for additional timeline information.

Per the 2022-CTRules-3rdAmdt, which amends the 2019-CTRules, upon obtaining approval from the DCGI, the sponsor must notify CDSCO via Form CT-06A (see 2022-CTRules-3rdAmdt) prior to initiating the clinical trial. The DCGI will then record the information provided on this form and it will become part of the official record of the DCGI’s approval. The DCGI grants permission to initiate a clinical trial via either Form CT-06 (see 2019-CTRules) or as an automatic approval via Form CT-4A (see 2019-CTRules). 2022-CTRules-3rdAmdt further states that when the DCGI approves a clinical trial of a new drug already approved outside India per the 2019-CTRules, the sponsor must also notify CDSCO via Form CT-06A, and this record will become part of the official record of the DCGI’s guaranteed approval.

Per the 2019-CTRules, the DCGI’s permission to initiate a clinical trial granted via either Form CT-06 or as an automatic approval via Form CT-4A will remain valid for two (2) years from the date of its issue, unless extended by the DCGI as noted in the 2019-CTRules and IND-31.

In addition, per the 2019-CTRules, an investigator should not implement any deviations from or changes to the protocol without the sponsor’s agreement and after obtaining the EC’s prior review and documented approval or favorable opinion of the amendment. All protocol amendments should be submitted to the DCGI in writing along with the EC approval letter. Similarly, the G-ICMR indicates that the EC must review and approve any protocol amendments, major deviations, or violations prior to those changes being implemented.

The 2019-CTRules explains that the exception to this requirement is when it is necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to the trial participant or when the changes involved are only logistical or administrative in nature. In this case, the EC as well as the DCGI must be notified immediately of all such exceptions. The DCGI should be notified of administrative or logistical changes or minor amendments in the protocol within 30 days.

The Hdbk-ClinTrial and the 2019-CTRules also note that application reviews should be based on the following evaluation parameters:

Assessment of risk versus benefit to the patients
Innovation vis-à-vis existing therapeutic option
Unmet medical need in the country
Safety/dosage/investigational tests (e.g., pharmacogenetic tests)
Any additional information or study(ies) needed before marketing approval for inclusion in package insert/ summary product characteristic (SmPC) post marketing
See IND-46 for additional information on conducting clinical trials in India. For specific guidelines regarding gene therapy and stem cell therapy clinical trials, see the G-GeneThrpy and the G-StemCellRes.

(See the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for detailed submission requirements.)

Waiving Local Clinical Trials

As delineated in the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, the DCGI, with the approval of the Central Government, may waive the requirement to conduct a local trial for a new drug already approved outside India. Order7Aug24, in accordance with Rule 101 in the 2019-CTRules, and the G-SECs further specify that the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan, Australia, Canada, and the European Union are the countries for which the DCGI may waive a local clinical trial for applications requesting permission to conduct a clinical trial and for applications requesting permission to import or manufacture new drugs in the following new drug categories:

Orphan drugs for rare diseases
Gene and cellular therapy products
New drugs used in pandemic situations
New drugs used for special defense purpose
New drugs having significant therapeutic advance over the current standard care
The 2019-CTRules explains that for applications to request permission to import or manufacture a new drug, a local clinical trial may be waived if the following conditions are met:

The new drug is approved and marketed in the countries specified by the DCGI in Order7Aug24, and no major unexpected serious adverse events have been reported, or
The DCGI has already granted permission to conduct a Global Clinical Trial with the new drug that is currently ongoing in India and this new drug has also been approved for marketing in one (1) of the countries specified by the DCGI in Order7Aug24, and
There is no probability or evidence, on the basis of existing knowledge, of any difference in the metabolism of the new drug by the Indian population, or any factor that may affect the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and safety and efficacy of the new drug, and
The applicant has committed in writing to conducting a Phase IV clinical trial to establish the new drug’s safety and efficacy per the DCGI-approved formulation
For countries that do not meet the waiver eligibility requirements, the 2019-CTRules states that these applications must be approved by the DCGI within 90 working days from the date of application receipt. The G-SECs also explains that the SEC's recommendation to grant a clinical trial waiver should be explicit, stated as either "Yes" or "No," and supported by a detailed justification. This justification must be formally documented. The waiver should comply with the provisions of the 2019-CTRules, while ensuring that the interests of all relevant parties are appropriately addressed.

Refer to the Manufacturing & Import section for detailed information on import requirements for new drugs already approved outside of India.

Inspection

As per the 2019-CTRules and the 2024-CTRulesAmdt, the DCGI carries out inspections of clinical trial site premises of the sponsor or the registered clinical research organization. (Per 2024-CTRulesAmdt, clinical research organizations are entities delegated with the sponsor's clinical trial or bioavailability or bioequivalence responsibilities.) CDSCO officers may enter the premises with or without prior notice to verify good clinical practice (GCP) compliance, and to inspect, search, or seize any record, statistical result, document, investigational drug, and other related material. Officers may be accompanied by state licensing authority officers or by outside experts as authorized by the DCGI.

Additionally, the 2019-CTRules notes that if the approval provisions have not been met, the DCGI may, after giving the sponsor an opportunity to respond, issue a written order, and take one (1) or more of the following actions: issue a warning in writing describing the deficiency or defect observed, which may affect adversely the right or well-being of a trial participant or the validity of clinical trial; reject the clinical trial results; suspend or cancel the permission granted under in Form CT-06 or Form CT-4A (see 2019-CTRules); or debar the investigator or the sponsor including the sponsor’s representatives from conducting any future clinical trial.

See also the 2024-CTRulesAmdt, for actions CDSCO may take if a clinical research organization fails to comply with the 2024-CTRulesAmdt registration approval provisions. See IND-34 for the DCGI’s GCP Inspection Checklist.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Note: The SUGAM Portal is not accessible outside of India.

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization

As per the 2019-CTRules and IND-42, a sponsor (applicant) is responsible for a paying a fee to the Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), head of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO), to submit a clinical trial application.

The 2019-CTRules specify that Form CT-04 should be accompanied by one (1) of the following officially mandated fees:

3,00,000 Rupees for Phase I (human) clinical trials
2,00,000 Rupees for Phase II (exploratory) clinical trials
2,00,000 Rupees for Phase III (confirmatory) clinical trials
2,00,000 Rupees for Phase IV clinical trials
50,000 Rupees for reconsideration of application for permission to conduct clinical trial
According to the 2019-CTRules, the sponsor must also submit a fee of 5,000 Rupees per product with an application for permission to manufacture or import the investigational product (IP) to be used in a clinical trial.

In addition, the 2019-CTRules states that no fee is required to be paid along with the clinical trial application if a trial is being conducted by an institution or an organization wholly or partially funded or owned by the Central Government of India or one of India’s state government institute(s). See also IND-31 for additional information on CDSCO fee requirements.

As delineated in the 2024-CTRulesAmdt and Notice4Mar25, clinical research organizations are required to pay a fee to register with CDSCO. The registration application fee is 5,00,000 Rupees to register as a new user. Notice4Mar25 indicates that the fee is also 5,00,000 Rupees to renew an existing registration. In the case of a rejected application, the 2024-CTRulesAmdt further specifies that the fee is 1,00,000 Rupees for a submitted application to be reconsidered by CDSCO.

Per IND-24, for applications submitted to the National Single Window System (NSWS) portal (IND-3), users should pay any required fees directly to CDSCO or any other ministry/department/state responsible for processing the application via IND-3.

Payment Instructions

As described in the 2019-CTRules, application payments must be made electronically via the Bank of Baroda, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi-110001, any other Bank of Baroda branch, or any other bank approved by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW) via the Bharatkosh payment gateway, which is accessed from the SUGAM portal (IND-59). The payment should be credited to: Head of Account, 0210-Medical and Public Health, 04-Public Health, 104-Fees and Fines per the 2019-CTRules, also known as the head of Fees & Fines, according to IND-42.

According to IND-42, once the user completes the payment, the bank payment gateway will confirm that the payment was successful, and the user will be redirected to the online payment status page in the SUGAM portal (IND-59) to view the e-Challan (payment receipt). IND-42 also specifies that the online payment will take two (2) to three (3) days to be credited to the National Portal of India’s Payment & Account Office. Therefore, users are requested to initiate online payments at least three (3) days prior to submitting an application to CDSCO. Refer to IND-42 for detailed fee requirements and online payment instructions via the SUGAM portal (IND-59).

As indicated in Notice4Mar25, clinical research organizations should submit their registration payment electronically using the Bharatkosh payment gateway, which is accessed via the SUGAM portal (IND-59). See Notice4Mar25 for detailed instructions in the accompanying user registration manual.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Overview

As delineated in the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, India has a decentralized process for the ethical review of clinical trial applications, and requires ethics committee (EC) approval for each trial site. Because there is no national EC in the country, ECs are based at either institutions/organizations, or function independently, and must meet the requirements set forth in the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR. Prior to initiating and throughout the duration of a trial, every trial site must be overseen by an EC registered with the Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), head of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO).

Ethics Committees for Biomedical and Health Research

Per the 2019-CTRules, CDSCO requires institutions that intend to conduct biomedical and health research to have an EC that reviews and oversees this type of research study. In addition, CDSCO has also established a separate registration and monitoring system for ECs that review biomedical and health research. See the Scope of Review section for additional information on biomedical and research study requirements.

Ethics Committee Composition

Pursuant to the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, an institutional/independent EC should be multidisciplinary and multi-sectorial, representing a mixed gender and age composition. ECs that review clinical trial applications and those that review biomedical and health research share the same composition criteria including affiliations, qualifications, member specific roles and responsibilities, as well as terms of reference and review procedures.

As per the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and IND-21, the EC composition should include the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Chairperson from outside the institute (Vice Chairperson (optional))
One (1) to two (2) basic medical scientists (preferably one (1) pharmacologist)
One (1) to two (2) clinicians from various institutions
Legal expert(s) or retired judge
One (1) social scientist/representative of non-governmental voluntary agency
One (1) philosopher/ethicist/theologian
One (1) lay person from the community
Member secretary (Alternative Member secretary optional)
One (1) member whose primary area of interest/specialization is non-scientific
At least one (1) member independent of the institution/trial site
50% percent of its members are not affiliated with the institute or organization in which the EC is constituted
Additionally, per the 2019-CTRules, EC members are required to:

Be familiar with key clinical regulatory requirements as delineated in the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR that reference both the Declaration of Helsinki (IND-63) and the most recently updated International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (IND-41)
Have post-graduate qualifications and experience in their fields if representing basic medical scientists/clinicians
Represent the specific patient group as much as possible based on the research area requirement
Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

As delineated in the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and IND-21, each EC should have written standard operating procedures (SOPs) specifying how the committees should function in general. The SOPs should include a statement on terms of appointment including duration and conditions; policy for removal/replacement; resignation procedure; meeting frequency; payment of processing fee to EC for review; honorariums to members and invited experts; maintenance of EC documentation and communication records, etc. The latest version of the SOPs should be made available to the members. IND-21 also notes that each EC should have SOPs for vulnerable populations and have a policy regarding training for new and existing members. In addition, per the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, members should have no conflict of interest, and should voluntarily withdraw from the EC while making a decision on an application if a proposal evokes a conflict of interest. The G-ICMR indicates the term of membership is generally two (2) to three (3) years, and may be extended.

In terms of training, the G-ICMR and IND-21 also specify each member must (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Provide a recent signed and detailed Curriculum Vitae (CV) and training certificates on human research protection and good clinical practice (GCP) guidelines and in compliance with 2019-CTRules
Either be trained in human research protection and/or GCP at the time of induction into the EC, or undergo training and submit training certificates within six (6) months of appointment (or as per institutional policy)
Be willing to undergo training or update their skills/knowledge during their tenure as an EC member
Further, if required, the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, state subject experts could also be invited to offer their views, which must be recorded; however, the experts would not have any voting rights. Only members independent of the trial and the trial sponsor (applicant) should vote/provide opinions in study related matters. In addition, all records must be safely maintained after the completion or termination of the study for at least five (5) years from the date of the trial’s completion or termination (both hard and soft copies).

The G-ICMR specifies that all EC members should review all proposals. Members should be given at least one (1) week to review the proposal and related documents, except in the case of expedited reviews. The Member Secretary should screen the proposals for their completeness and categorize them into three (3) types according to risk level: exemption from review, expedited review, or full committee review. An investigator cannot decide that a protocol falls in the exempted category without an EC review. Per the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, a minimum of five (5) members is required for the quorum.

For detailed EC procedures and information on other administrative processes, see the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and IND-5. See also IND-27 and IND-28 for the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)’s research conduct policies.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Overview

The primary scope of information assessed by ethics committees (ECs) relates to maintaining and protecting the rights, safety, and well-being of all research participants, especially those in vulnerable populations, in accordance with the requirements set forth in the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, the G-Children, the Declaration of Helsinki (IND-63), and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (IND-41). (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations).

The 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR also state that ECs must ensure an independent, timely, and competent review of all ethical aspects of the research protocols. They must act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved by evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants, and they must verify the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards. Per the G-Children, ECs providing opinions on studies involving children should also include members with pediatric expertise. The expert(s) may be permanent EC members or invited as subject experts to provide advice and be consulted on an ad-hoc basis.

See also the G-AI-BiomedRes for EC review guidelines for biomedical and health research proposals involving artificial intelligence-based tools and technologies.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

As per the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and IND-31, the Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), head of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO), and a DCGI-registered EC must approve a clinical trial application prior to the sponsor (applicant) initiating the trial, except in the case of non-regulatory academic clinical trials that only require EC approval. IND-31 further states that the DCGI review and approval process may be conducted in parallel with the EC review for each clinical trial site. However, per the 2019-CTRules and the Hdbk-ClinTrial, CDSCO must confirm the EC approvals for each participating site have been obtained per the protocol prior to approving the initiation of the study. (Note: the Hdbk-ClinTrial has not yet been updated to fully align with the 2019-CTRules.)

The 2019-CTRules, the Hdbk-ClinTrial, and IND-31 specify that an EC must grant a separate approval for each trial site to be used, and the DCGI must be informed of each approval. A trial may only be initiated at each respective site after obtaining an EC approval for that site. The 2019-CTRules and IND-31 further state that if a site does not have an EC, it may obtain approval from another site’s EC provided that it is located within the same city or within a radius of 50 kilometers of the trial site. The DCGI should be notified of the EC’s approval within 15 working days of the approval being granted per the 2019-CTRules. Per the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, the EC of each site should notify the DCGI of its approval and provide a copy within 15 working days of making this decision. Refer to IND-36 for the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)’s EC clinical trials application form.

During a clinical trial, per the 2019-CTRules, an investigator should not implement any deviations from or changes to the trial protocol without agreement by the sponsor and after obtaining the EC’s prior review and documented approval or favorable opinion of the amendment. All protocol amendments should be submitted to the DCGI in writing along with the EC’s approval letter.

The 2019-CTRules further states that the exception to this requirement is when it is necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to the trial participant or when the changes involved are only logistical or administrative in nature. In this case, the EC as well as the DCGI must be notified immediately of all such exceptions. The DCGI should also be notified of administrative or logistical changes or minor amendments in the protocol within 30 days.

As delineated in the 2019-CTRules, ECs also have a continuing responsibility to monitor approved clinical trials and biomedical and health research studies to ensure ethical compliance throughout the study duration.

For all studies, the G-ICMR indicates that ECs must review and approve any protocol amendments, major deviations, or violations at regular intervals.

There is no stated expiration date for an EC approval in the 2019-CTRules or the G-ICMR. However, per the 2019-CTRules, in the event that an EC revokes its approval of a clinical protocol, it must record its reasons for doing so and immediately communicate this decision to the investigator as well as to the DCGI.

Per the 2019-CTRules, the EC must also maintain data, records, registers, and other documents related to the conduct and review of the clinical trial for a period of five (5) years after completion of the study. For detailed EC review procedures and information on other administrative processes, see the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, IND-5, and IND-27. See also IND-36 for the EC clinical trial application form and IND-52 for other commonly used EC review forms.

The G-ICMR further states that research during humanitarian emergencies and disasters can be reviewed by an EC through an expedited review and scheduled/unscheduled full committee meetings, and this may be decided by the member secretary on a case-by-case basis depending on the urgency and need. If an expedited review is done, full ethical review should follow as soon as possible. The EC should also closely monitor the conduct and outcome of research. See Section 12.5 of the G-ICMR for additional information on EC review requirements during humanitarian emergencies.

For specific guidelines regarding gene therapy and stem cell therapy clinical trials, see G-GeneThrpy and G-StemCellRes.

Academic Clinical Trials

As defined by the 2019-CTRules, an academic clinical trial is a clinical trial of a drug already approved for a certain claim and initiated by any investigator, academic or research institution for a new indication or new route of administration, or, new dose or new dosage form, where the results of such a trial are intended to be used only for academic or research purposes and not for seeking DCGI approval or regulatory authority approval in any country for marketing or commercial purpose.

The 2019-CTRules and IND-31 specify that an academic clinical trial does not require DCGI approval as long as the following conditions are met:

The trial is approved by the EC, and
The data generated is not intended for submission to the DCGI
In addition, per the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, the EC should inform the DCGI about the academic trials it has approved and cases where there could be an overlap between the clinical trial for academic and regulatory purposes. If the DCGI does not comment to the EC within 30 days from receiving EC notification, it should be presumed that DCGI permission is not required.

IND-25 further explains that a drug import license is not required for EC-approved academic trials that will be using a permitted drug formulation with a new indication, a new route of administration, a new dose, or a new dosage form. See the Manufacturing & Import section for detailed information.

Biomedical and Health Research

According to the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, biomedical and health research is defined as studies that include basic research, applied and operational research, or clinical research designed primarily to increase scientific knowledge about diseases and conditions (physical or socio-behavioral); their detection and cause; and evolving strategies for health promotion, prevention, or the amelioration of disease and rehabilitation.

As discussed in Notice15Sept19 and Chapter IV of the 2019-CTRules, any institution or organization that intends to conduct biomedical and health research involving human participants is required to have an EC to review and oversee the conduct of such research before the study is initiated and throughout its duration. See also IND-28 for ICMR’s biomedical and health research conduct policies.

The EC must also be registered with the designated authority within the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Department of Health Research (DHR). Refer to the Oversight of Ethics Committees section for detailed registration requirements.

Multicenter Research

As delineated in the G-ICMR, in a multicenter research study, all of the participating study sites are required to obtain approval from their respective ECs. Each EC may conduct a separate review, or the ECs may decide to designate a main EC, with the others choosing to accept its decision. The study sites also typically follow a common protocol to avoid duplication of effort, wastage of time, and issues arising with communication between committees.

Per the G-ICMR, in the event that sites choose to have separate EC reviews, the following requirements must be met:

The participating site ECs/Secretariats should establish communication with one another
If any EC does not grant approval for a study at a site, the reasons must be shared with other ECs and should be considered
The EC can suggest site-specific protocols and informed consent modifications as per local needs
A separate review may be requested for studies with a higher degree of risk, clinical trials, or interventional studies where conduct may vary depending on the site, or, for any other reason that requires closer review and attention. See the G-ICMR for additional participating site requirements when a primary EC is selected for common EC review.

Per the G-ICMR, when the multicenter research study designates one (1) main EC, the nominated EC members that represent the participating sites may attend the meeting of the elected EC. The designated EC should also be in India and be registered with the relevant authority (either the DCGI or the DHR depending on the type of study). In addition, the decision to conduct a common review is only applicable for ECs in India. In the case of international collaboration for research and approval by a foreign institution, the local participating study sites would be required to obtain approval from a local EC. Refer to the G-ICMR for detailed information on multicenter studies that use the common review practice and involve international collaborations.

The G-ICMR also notes that the local site requirements (e.g., informed consent, research implementation and its monitoring) may be performed by the local EC, which would require good communication and coordination between the researchers and the EC secretariats representing the participating sites.

See the G-MultictrResRev for additional guidelines on streamlining the ethics review process for multicenter biomedical and health research studies conducted by the ICMR or its network of institutions.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
As indicated in the G-ICMR, ethics committees (ECs) may charge a reasonable fee to cover the expenses related to optimal functioning to conduct reviews. EC members may also be given reasonable compensation for their time to attend EC meetings, and every institution should allocate adequate funds to ensure the smooth functioning of the EC.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Note: The SUGAM Portal is not accessible outside of India.

Overview

In accordance with the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, all ethics committees (ECs) that review drug clinical trials are required to register with the Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), head of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO), prior to reviewing and approving a clinical trial protocol. As delineated in Notice15Sept19 and Chapter IV of the 2019-CTRules, all ECs that review biomedical and health research studies are required to register with the designated authority within the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW)’s Department of Health Research (DHR). According to Notice15Sept19 and IND-51, the DHR appointed the National Ethics Committee Registry for Biomedical and Health Research (NECRBHR) (IND-51) to facilitate the receipt and processing of registration applications.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

Registration Provisions for Clinical Trial Ethics Committees

As specified in the 2019-CTRules and Notice1Aug18, ECs that intend to review clinical trial research protocols must submit Form CT-01 via the SUGAM portal (IND-59) to register with the DCGI. The DCGI, in turn, will review the application within 45 working days from the date of receipt and, if satisfied with the information provided, grant the EC's registration request via Form CT-02. Per 2022-CTRules-3rdAmdt, provided that no communication has been received from the DCGI within the stated period of 45 working days, the EC registration will be deemed granted by the DCGI, and such registration will be regarded as legally valid for all purposes and the applicant will be authorized to initiate a clinical trial in accordance with these rules. 2022-CTRules-3rdAmdt further states that once the EC has obtained provisional approval from the DCGI per the 2019-CTRules, the committee must also notify CDSCO via Form CT-02A, which will become part of the official record known as the guaranteed registration of the DCGI.

Per the 2019-CTRules and IND-53, the EC registration will remain valid for a period of five (5) years from the date of issue, unless suspended or cancelled sooner. The EC may apply for registration renewal via SUGAM (IND-59) using Form CT-01 and should include all additional required documentation 90 days prior to the registration’s expiration date. The registration will remain in force until the DCGI passes a new registration order and as long as the application is received within the specified 90-day deadline. Following the DCGI’s review of the application and inspection report, if any, and provided that there are no changes to the documentation included in the original application, the EC’s request for registration renewal will be granted within 45 working days from the date of application receipt. See also IND-42 for detailed fee requirements and online payment instructions via IND-59.

The 2019-CTRules also states that if the EC fails to comply with any of the registration conditions, the DCGI may, after giving the EC an opportunity to show cause as to why such an order should not be passed, prepare an order in writing to suspend or cancel the EC registration for such period as deemed necessary. The suspended or cancelled EC can appeal to the DCGI within the period specified in the notice demonstrating cause, and, after consideration, the DCGI may respond by taking one (1) or more of the following actions:

Withdraw the notice
Issue a warning to the EC describing the deficiency or defect observed during an inspection
Reject the results of the clinical trial
Suspend for a specified period or cancel the registration, or
Debar its members to oversee any future trial for a specified period
The aggrieved EC may file an appeal to the Government of India (Central Government) within 60 working days. The Central Government may subsequently pass an order in response to the appeal within 60 working days from the date of the appeal filing.

See IND-21 for a checklist of CDSCO’s EC registration requirements, and IND-69 for a checklist to re-register ECs. Refer to IND-49 for a list of registered ECs, and IND-48 for a list of re-registered ECs.

The EC must also allow CDSCO officials to enter the committee premises to inspect any records, data, documents, or other materials related to a clinical trial. The EC must provide adequate replies to any queries raised by the inspecting authority in relation to the conduct of the trial as noted in the 2019-CTRules. Refer to IND-81 for a checklist of EC inspection requirements.

Registration Provisions for Biomedical and Health Research Ethics Committees

As explained in Notice15Sept19 and IND-51, ECs planning to review biomedical and health research studies are required to register with the DHR’s NECRBHR. The NECRBHR facilitates the receipt and processing of application submissions, which is carried out electronically via the DHR’s NAITIK portal (IND-54). (Note: Users outside of India may not have access to IND-54. Also, note that the portal link is located at the bottom of the IND-54 webpage.)

Per the 2019-CTRules, the EC must submit an application to the DHR using Form CT-01 along with the required information and documentation specified in Table 1 of the Third Schedule of the 2019-CTRules. Upon receipt of the application, the DHR must grant provisional registration to the EC for a period of two (2) years. Final registration will be granted to the EC on Form CT-03 when the DHR has completed its review of the application and the associated documentation. The final registration will remain valid for a period of five (5) years from the date of its issue, unless suspended or cancelled sooner.

The 2019-CTRules further states that the EC may also apply to request registration renewal using Form CT-01 along with the specified documentation at least 90 days prior to the final registration’s expiration date. The final registration will remain in force until the DHR completes its review of the renewal application provided that the following conditions are met:

The DHR does not require the EC to provide a new set of documents
There have been no changes in the submitted documents since the final registration was granted, and
The EC submits a certificate to the DHR validating that the documents have not changed
Per 2019-CTRules, following a review of the registration renewal application and further inquiry to confirm there have been no documentation changes, the DHR will renew the EC’s registration on Form CT-03 within 45 working days from the date of application receipt. The renewed registration will remain valid for five (5) years from the date of its issue, unless suspended or cancelled sooner.

If the EC fails to comply with any of the registration conditions, the 2019-CTRules notes that the DHR may, after giving the EC an opportunity to show cause as to why such an order should not be passed, prepare an order in writing to suspend or cancel the EC registration for such period as deemed appropriate. The suspended or cancelled EC can appeal to the DHR, and after consideration, the DHR may respond by taking one (1) or more of the following actions:

Issue a warning to the EC describing the deficiency or defect observed, which may adversely affect the rights or well-being of the study participants
Suspend the EC for a specified period or cancel the registration, or
Debar its members from overseeing any future biomedical health research for a specified period
Per the 2019-CTRules, the aggrieved EC may file an appeal to the Government of India (Central Government) within 45 working days. In response to the appeal, as deemed necessary, and after giving the EC an opportunity to be heard, the Central Government may subsequently pass an order considered appropriate to the case.

(Note: Notice15Sept19 and IND-51 provide the most current requirements regarding submitting registration applications electronically via the DHR’s NAITIK portal (IND-54).)

Additional Provisions for Clinical Trial and Biomedical and Health Research Ethics Committees

In addition to requiring all ECs to register with the relevant regulatory authority (the DCGI or the DHR), the G-ICMR specifies that ECs should be encouraged to seek recognition, certification, and accreditation from established national and international bodies (e.g., the SIDCER-FERCAP Foundation, the Association for the Accreditation of Human Research Protection Programs (AAHRPP), CDSCO, and the Quality Council of India through National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare Providers (NABH), etc.). Although voluntary, the G-ICMR states that these certifications and accreditations should be continually updated to help with quality assurance and quality improvement and ensure that ECs comply with best practices to protect research participants.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Note: The SUGAM Portal is not accessible outside of India.  

New Info (Not Yet in Profile) 

DCGI notice related to regulatory submissions through the SUGAM Portal:  

Notice from October 27, 2025 - Post Approval Changes for Clinical Trials (Form CT-06) For Form CТ-04 for Cell and Gene Therapeutics Products (CGTP); the notice states that the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) will no longer accept offline submissions of CGTP clinical trial applications after October 24, 2025 

Overview

In accordance with the 2019-CTRules, the Hdbk-ClinTrial, the G-ICMR, and IND-31, the sponsor (applicant) is required to submit a clinical trial application to the Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), head of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO), to obtain authorization to conduct a clinical trial in India. The investigator must also obtain ethics committee (EC) approval from a DCGI-registered EC prior to initiating a study. According to IND-31, the DCGI review and approval process may be conducted in parallel with the EC review for each clinical trial site. However, per the 2019-CTRules and the Hdbk-ClinTrial, CDSCO must confirm the EC approvals for each participating site have been obtained per the protocol prior to approving the initiation of the study. (Note: the Hdbk-ClinTrial has not yet been updated to fully align with the 2019-CTRules.)

For specific guidelines regarding gene therapy and stem cell therapy clinical trial submissions, see G-GeneThrpy and G-StemCellRes.

Regulatory Submission

SUGAM Pre-Submission Registration

As explained in IND-42, CDSCO created the SUGAM portal (IND-59) to be used by applicants to apply for no objection certificates (NOCs), licenses, registration certificates, permissions, and approvals. Once submitted, applicants can track their applications, respond to queries, and download CDSCO issued permissions. Only importers, Indian authorized agents, foreign enterprises that hold an Indian subsidiary, and corporate users can register via IND-59. Although not directly specified in the 2019-CTRules, IND-46 notes that a foreign sponsor should appoint a local representative or contract research organization to fulfill local responsibilities. Per 2024-CTRulesAmdt and Notice4Mar25, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW) also requires clinical research organizations, which are entities delegated with the sponsor's clinical trial or bioavailability or bioequivalence responsibilities, to register in IND-59. See Notice4Mar25 for the accompanying user registration manual. For additional IND-59 registration requirements, see IND-42.

NSWS Portal Pre-Submission Registration

Per Notice1Jan24, CDSCO launched the National Single Window System (NSWS) portal (IND-3) to serve as a one-stop shop for all approvals, licenses, registrations, and clearances. Per Notice1Jan24 and Notice16Jan24, users can access the following CDSCO steps and processes via IND-3: medical device related registration, manufacturing/import applications, and drug manufacturing/import applications. Per IND-24, while IND-3 does not charge a fee for registration, users are required to pay any fees required by CDSCO or any other ministry/department/state to process applications submitted for approval via IND-3.

IND-24 states that to access the NSWS portal (IND-3) services, users are required to sign up by registering with an email address and mobile phone to create a business profile. Per IND-61, users are also required to have a tax identification number known as a Permanent Account Number (PAN) to complete the profile. According to IND-33, a PAN is issued by the Government of India’s Income Tax Department. Both domestic and foreign users can apply for a PAN using the appropriate application form. According to IND-62 and IND-64, the user’s PAN will need to be verified using a Digital Signature Certificate (DSC) for the business profile. Please refer to IND-62 and IND-64 for detailed instructions on completing this verification process. See also IND-4 for a complete list of IND-3 user guides.

Submissions

As indicated in the Notice15Jan18, all clinical trial application submissions must be submitted electronically via CDSCO’s SUGAM portal (IND-59). Refer to IND-42 for instructions on uploading forms and related documentation via IND-59.

Additionally, applications to add a clinical trial site and/or to change a principal investigator (PI) should be submitted via the SUGAM portal (IND-59) for clinical trials of biological products (vaccine and rDNA) (per Notice24Feb25), as well as for global clinical trials, new drug clinical trials, and trials of subsequent new drugs, investigational new drugs, fixed dose combinations, and bioavailability and bioequivalence studies (per Notice26Dec24). Notice24Feb25 and Notice26Dec24 specify that the applicant should submit an application along with the checklist of documents and the EC’s approval for both application types. See Timeline of Review section for CDSCO’s review timelines.

See also Notice9Jul25 for cell and gene therapeutic product clinical trial application (Phases I- III) submission requirements via the SUGAM portal (IND-59).

Per Notice12Oct23 and IND-7, CDSCO’s Clinical Research Unit (CRU) Division also requests that stakeholders submit bulky regulatory dossiers, documents, query replies, and similar materials in soft copy format. The soft copies should be submitted in PDF format and ideally less than 20 MB on a CD or pen drive to the CRU Division or submitted via email to cru.division@cdsco.nic.in. The files will then be forwarded to the appropriate Division along with the stakeholder’s cover letter.

The DCA-DCR delineates that English should be used for specific documents included in the clinical trial application submission. For the informed consent form and patient information sheet, English and/or the vernacular language of the participant(s) should be used. English should also be used for the package inserts.

In addition, per Notice31Jan24, CDSCO’s Subject Expert Committee (SEC) Division is responsible for conducting meetings to evaluate investigational new drug (IND) proposals. Applicants are requested to submit a copy of their proposal presentation only to the appropriate SEC division via the SUGAM portal (IND-59) after receiving an invitation letter from CDSCO, and well in advance of the scheduled meeting.

Ethics Review Submission

As indicated in the 2019-CTRules, the Hdbk-ClinTrial, the G-ICMR, and IND-31, India requires all clinical trials of drugs involving human participants to be reviewed by a DCGI-registered EC. Because the submission process at individual institutional ECs will vary, applicants should review and follow their institution’s specific requirements. The G-ICMR also specifies that investigators should submit research proposals as soft or hard copies to the EC Secretariat for review in the prescribed format and required documents as per EC standard operating procedures (SOPs).

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

As per the 2019-CTRules, the Hdbk-ClinTrial, IND-32, and IND-35, documentation must be submitted to the Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), head of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO), as part of the approval process for investigational new drugs (INDs) will depend upon the type of application, phase of the study, stage in drug development process, and/or objective of the study. Information that may be required is included in the lists below (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Form CT-04 (the clinical trial application form including sponsor (applicant) name; sponsor nature/constitution and contact information; clinical trials site contact information and details; contact information for person responsible for compensation payment, if any; correspondence address; new drug/investigational new drug name(s) and details (i.e., therapeutic class, dosage form, composition, and indications); clinical trial phase; protocol number with date; and ethics committee (EC) and investigator names)
Treasury Challan receipt demonstrating payment of corresponding fee or transaction ID
Chemical and pharmaceutical information
Animal pharmacology data
Animal toxicology data
Human clinical pharmacology data
Active ingredient information (for INDs and global clinical trials (GCTs))
Formulation data (for INDs and GCTs)
Therapeutic class (for INDs and GCTs)
Regulatory status in India and in other countries
Proposed study status in other participating countries and any approvals, withdrawals, discontinuation of approval, etc. (for GCTs)
Affidavit stating study has not been discontinued in any country (for GCTs)
Prescribing information
Testing protocol(s) for quality control testing
Clinical study protocol
Dosage form
Justification and schematic diagram/flow chart proposed study and design (for INDs and GCTs)
Number of patients globally (for GCTs) and number of patients to be enrolled from India (for INDs and GCTs)
Details of all sites selected and assessment for suitability of sites and investigators (with contact details)
EC registration status of the selected sites
Relevance of study, investigational drug, or any specific study aspects to the health care needs of India
Innovation vis-à-vis existing therapeutic options
Unmet medical need in the country (as applicable)
Any India-specific safety/dosage concerns/investigational tests to be done
Clinical study reports should be submitted per the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) Common Technical Document (CTD) (IND-68)
Protocol safety measures per toxicological studies; early clinical studies, approved product insert for marketed product, and published literature
Investigator’s Brochure (IB)
Investigational Medicinal Products Dossier (IMPD) (for GCTs)
Affidavit stating the IB information is correct and based on facts (for GCTs)
Source of bulk drugs (for INDs)
Treasury Challan with Application for Grant of License to Import New Drug or Investigational New Drug for Clinical Trial or Bioavailability or Bioequivalence Study or for Examination, Test and Analysis (CT-16) (IND-11) (for GCTs)
Sponsor authorization letter (for GCTs)
Details of biological specimens to be exported and the online application for export no objection certificate (NOC) for biological samples on the SUGAM portal (IND-59) (for GCTs) (See IND-1 for the application form to request a NOC to export biological samples) (Refer to the Specimens topic for more information on specimen import/export)
Case Report Form (CRF)
Informed consent form (ICF) and patient information sheet (See Required Elements section for additional information)
Investigator(s) undertaking
EC approvals (if available)
Clinical study report(s)
Investigator list in India and site address
See the 2019-CTRules, the Hdbk-ClinTrial, IND-32, and IND-35 for detailed DCGI application submission requirements. See also IND-22 for details on the IND-59 approval process for GCTs and IND-31 for clinical trial FAQs. (Note: The Hdbk-ClinTrial has not yet been updated to fully align with the 2019-CTRules.)

Refer to the 2019-CTRules and IND-31 to obtain detailed submission requirements for applications to conduct a clinical trial using an already approved new drug with a new indication, a new dosage form/new route of administration, a modified release dosage form, or a new drug with an additional strength.

See also the 2024-CTRulesAmdt for detailed CDSCO’s clinical research organization registration application submission requirements.

Ethics Committee Requirements

Each institutional EC has its own application form and clearance requirements, which can differ significantly regarding the number of copies to be supplied and application format requirements. However, per the G-ICMR, the requirements listed below are basically consistent and shared by all of the Indian ECs:

Cover letter to the Member Secretary
Type of review requested
Application form for initial review (IND-39)
Informed consent document (in English and the local language(s)) including translation and back translation certificates, if applicable
Case record form/questionnaire
Recruitment procedures (e.g., advertisement, notices) if applicable
Patient instruction card, diary, etc., if applicable
IB (as applicable for drugs, biological, or device trials)
Details of funding agency/sponsor and fund allocation, if applicable
Investigators’ Curriculum Vitaes (CVs)
Conflict of interest statement, if applicable
Good clinical practice (GCP) training certificate for investigators (preferably within last five (5) years)
Any other research ethics/other training evidence, if applicable as per EC standard operating procedures (SOPs)
List of ongoing research studies undertaken by the principal investigator, if applicable
Investigator’s undertaking statement with all participating investigator signatures
Regulatory permissions (as applicable)
Relevant administrative approvals (such as Health Ministry’s Screening Committee (HMSC) approval for international trials)
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) in case of studies involving collaboration with other institutions, if applicable
Clinical trial agreement between the sponsors, investigator, and the head of the institution(s), if applicable
Clinical trial registration documentation (preferable)
Insurance policy (it is preferable to have the policy as well as the insurance certificate) for study participants indicating conditions of coverage, date of commencement and date of expiry of coverage of risk (if applicable)
Indemnity policy, clearly indicating the conditions of coverage, commencement date, and expiry date of risk coverage (if applicable)
Any additional document(s), as required by EC (such as other EC clearances for multicentric studies)
Protocol
Furthermore, the ICMR has prepared a generic application for initial review (IND-39) that may be used by the EC. The form is also included in the bulleted list above.

Clinical Protocol

As delineated in the 2019-CTRules, the Hdbk-ClinTrial, and the G-ICMR, the clinical study protocol should include the following elements:

Title page
Table of contents
Brief summary (See G-ICMR)
Study rationale
Study objective
Study design and methodology
Study population
Justification of inclusion/exclusion of vulnerable populations (See G-ICMR)
Participant eligibility and recruitment procedures
Study assessments
Study conduct stating the types of activities that would be included (e.g., medical history, type of physical examination, etc.)
Study treatment
Ethical consideration
Study monitoring and supervision
Investigational product management (See Investigational Products topic for detailed coverage of this subject)
Data analysis
Undertaking by the Investigator statement
Appendices
The G-ICMR also mentions the following requirements:

Study duration
Justification for placebo, benefit-risk assessment, plans to withdraw; if standard therapies are to be withheld, justification for the same
Informed consent procedure and sample of the patient/participant information sheet and informed consent forms including audiovisual recording, if applicable, and informed consent for stored samples
Plan to maintain the privacy and confidentiality of the study participants
Adverse events/adverse drug reactions
For research involving more than minimal risk, an account of management of risk or injury
Proposed compensation, reimbursement of incidental expenses and management of research related injury/illness during and after research period
Provision of ancillary care for unrelated illness during the duration of research
Account of storage and maintenance of all data collected during the trial
Plans for publication of results while maintaining confidentiality of participants’ personal information/identity
For detailed information on these elements, see the 2019-CTRules, the Hdbk-ClinTrial, and the G-ICMR.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Overview

Based on the 2019-CTRules, the Hdbk-ClinTrial, the G-ICMR, and IND-31, the review and approval of a clinical trial application by the Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), head of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO), is dependent upon obtaining ethics committee (EC) approval from a DCGI-registered EC prior to initiating a study. According to IND-31, the DCGI review and approval process may be conducted at the same time as the EC review for each clinical trial site, except in the case of non-regulatory academic clinical trials that only require EC approval. However, per the 2019-CTRules and the Hdbk-ClinTrial, CDSCO must confirm the EC approvals for each participating site have been obtained per the protocol prior to approving the initiation of the study. (Note: the Hdbk-ClinTrial has not yet been updated to fully align with the 2019-CTRules.)

Regulatory Authority Approval

As specified in the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, upon receipt of a clinical trial application, the DCGI has 90 calendar days to evaluate the application for a new drug or an investigational new drug; 90 calendar days to evaluate a new drug already approved outside India; and 30 days to evaluate a drug discovered, researched, and manufactured in India. Per the Hdbk-ClinTrial, upon receipt of an application, a CDSCO official conducts the initial administrative review. If the application is deemed complete, within four (4) weeks following receipt, the official forwards the application along with a summary of their evaluation and a statement referring to the proposal to a Subject Expert Committee (SEC) for further technical review.

The 2019-CTRules further notes that the DCGI may, when required, constitute one (1) or more of these expert committees or group of experts with the specialization in relevant fields to evaluate scientific and technical drug-related issues. The committee/group may submit its recommendations within 60 days from the date of the request. See the Scope of Assessment section for more information on SEC composition and review processes.

Once the SEC has completed its review, the Hdbk-ClinTrial indicates that the committee sends its comments via email to CDSCO. Per the G-SECs, the SEC’s review should be completed within seven (7) days. Per the Hdbk-ClinTrial, CDSCO will then compile any written SEC comments requiring sponsor (applicant) clarification or modification and send this feedback to the sponsor within one (1) week of receipt. The applicant must submit a written reply to CDSCO within four (4) weeks of receiving the comments, which will, in turn, be sent to the SEC for review.

Following receipt of the sponsor’s response, the Hdbk-ClinTrial states that the DCGI (CDSCO) will issue a final decision by official communication (permission, rejection, or resubmission) to the Technical or Apex Committee within 15 days. In the case of a sponsor’s request for reconsideration, CDSCO will review the resubmitted application and send it to the SEC again or to the Technical Committee per the sponsor’s request. Following the SEC’s review, the DCGI (CDSCO) will send a final decision to the Technical or Apex Committee within 15 days. If CDSCO rejects the reconsideration request, the agency will send a letter to the sponsor to communicate this decision. Refer to the Hdbk-ClinTrial for additional timeline information.

Per the 2022-CTRules-3rdAmdt, which amends the 2019-CTRules, provided that no communication has been received from the DCGI within the stated period of 90 working days, permission to conduct all new drug or investigational new drug clinical trials as well as clinical trials for new drugs already approved outside India will be deemed granted by the DCGI. This permission will be regarded as legally valid for all purposes and the applicant will be authorized to initiate a clinical trial in accordance with these rules. Similarly, per the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, if the DCGI does not respond within 30 days to applications for drugs developed in India, the sponsor may conclude that permission to conduct the trial has been granted. Refer to the Scope of Assessment section for information on obtaining a waiver for an already approved drug. See also the Manufacturing & Import section for detailed information on import requirements for new drugs already approved outside of India.

In addition, per Notice24Feb25 and Notice26Dec24, an application to add a clinical trial site is deemed to be approved if no objection is received within 30 days of CDSCO’s receipt of the application for either clinical trials of biological products (vaccine and rDNA), or for global clinical trials, new drug clinical trials, and trials of subsequent new drugs, investigational new drugs, fixed dose combinations, and bioavailability and bioequivalence studies. A proposed change of principal investigator is deemed to be approved from the date of CDSCO’s receipt of the application, subject to the condition that application is complete as per the checklist. See Submission Process section for additional submission requirements.

For specific guidelines regarding gene therapy and stem cell therapy clinical trials, see the G-GeneThrpy and the G-StemCellRes.

See the 2024-CTRulesAmdt for CDSCO’s submission review and approval timelines to register or renew a clinical research organization registration.

Ethics Committee Approval

As per IND-82, the EC review and approval process, which occurs at the same time as the DCGI review and approval, generally takes from four (4) to eight (8) weeks.

The G-ICMR indicates that EC members should be given enough time (at least one (1) week) to review the proposal and related documents, except in the case of expedited review. While all EC members should review all submitted proposals, each EC may adopt different procedures for protocol review per their standard operating procedures.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Overview

As set forth in the 2019-CTRules, the Hdbk-ClinTrial, the G-ICMR, and IND-31, a clinical trial can only commence in India after the sponsor (applicant) receives permission from the Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI) and approval from the respective ethics committees (ECs). The DCGI is head of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO). According to the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, non-regulatory clinical trials intended for academic purposes only require institutional EC approval. (See the Scope of Review section for additional details). There is no waiting period required following the sponsor’s receipt of these approvals. (Note: the Hdbk-ClinTrial has not yet been updated to fully align with the 2019-CTRules.)

The 2022-CTRules-3rdAmdt, which amends the 2019-CTRules, further indicates that once the sponsor obtains approval from the DCGI for a new drug, an investigational new drug, or a new drug already approved outside India, the sponsor must notify CDSCO via Form CT-06A prior to initiating the clinical trial. The DCGI will then record the information provided on the form and it will become part of the official record known as the automatic approval of the DCGI.

In addition, per the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, the sponsor is required to obtain approval from the DCGI to manufacture or import investigational products (IPs) and to obtain an import license for the shipment of IPs to be used in the trial. (See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information.)

As explained in the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, the EC should notify the DCGI about the academic trials it has approved and about cases where there could be an overlap between a clinical trial for academic and regulatory purposes. If the DCGI does not provide comments to the EC within 30 days from receiving EC notification, then it should be presumed that DCGI permission is not required.

For specific guidelines regarding gene therapy and stem cell therapy clinical trials, see G-GeneThrpy and G-StemCellRes.

Clinical Trial Agreement

According to the 2019-CTRules, the sponsor must have an agreement with the investigator, which is to be provided to the EC. Furthermore, the investigator must sign an undertaking to conduct the trial in accordance with the protocol, good clinical practice guidelines, and all applicable requirements, among other things. For more details, see Table 4 (Third Schedule) in the 2019-CTRules.

Per the 2024-CTRulesAmdt, the trial or study related duties and functions transferred to and assumed by the clinical research organization must be specified in writing and properly quantified.

Clinical Trial Registration

Per the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and IND-31, it is mandatory for all sponsors to register their clinical trials, including academic trials, with the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)’s Clinical Trials Registry - India (CTRI) (IND-57) before initiating a study. Refer to the Scope of Review and Submission Process sections for further information on academic trials. Per the 2024-CTRulesAmdt, are also required to register new drug or investigational new drug (IND) clinical trials and IND bioavailability or bioequivalence studies with IND-57 prior to enrolling the first study participant.

According to IND-56, registrants are advised to factor in a minimum of 10 to 15 working days for trial review, verification, and validation and the submission must indicate “Not Yet Recruiting” for the trial’s status. A reference number (REF number) is issued to those registrants who have successfully submitted a trial to IND-57. Refer to IND-56 for additional instructions.

See the 2019-CTRules, the Hdbk-ClinTrial, IND-32, and IND-35 for detailed DCGI application submission requirements.

Governance

The 2024-CTRulesAmdt states that a clinical research organization must obtain approval from CDSCO and an EC prior to applying for registration. The clinical research organization should also be overseen by a person who is responsible for the overall activities of the organization and should have competent persons who are thoroughly familiar with the investigational products, the protocol, written informed consent forms or other information provided to the participants, the sponsor’s standard operating procedures, good clinical practice (GCP) guidelines, and other rules applicable to the conduct of clinical trial and or bioavailability or bioequivalence study.

2024-CTRulesAmdt also notes that if there is any change in the constitution or ownership of the clinical research organization, the organization must notify CDSCO in writing within 30 days of this change.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Note: The SUGAM Portal is not accessible outside of India.

Safety Reporting Definitions

In accordance with the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and IND-42, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of India’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any untoward medical occurrence (including a symptom/disease or an abnormal laboratory finding) during treatment with a pharmaceutical product in a patient or a human participant not necessarily related to the treatment
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – a noxious and unintended response at doses normally used or tested in humans (in cases of approved pharmaceutical products); a noxious and unintended response at any dose(s) (in cases of new unregistered pharmaceutical products); an untoward medical occurrence seemingly caused by overdosing, abuse/dependence and interactions with other medicinal products (in clinical trials)
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) – an AE or ADR that is associated with death, in-patient hospitalization (in case the study was being conducted on outpatients), prolongation of hospitalization (in case the study was being conducted on in-patients), persistent or significant disability or incapacity, a congenital anomaly or birth defect, or is otherwise life threatening. Per IND-42, Important Medical Events may be considered SAEs when they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one (1) of the outcomes listed in this definition
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction – an ADR, the nature or severity of which is not described in the informed consent/information sheet or the applicable product information, such as an investigator’s brochure (IB) for the unapproved investigational product (IP) or package insert/summary of product characteristics for an approved product (G-ICMR)
Safety Reporting Requirements

Per the 2019-CTRules, the sponsor (applicant) and the investigator must forward any SAE/SADR report, after due analysis, within 14 days of the occurrence to the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO)’s Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), the ethics committee (EC) Chairman, and the head of the institution where the trial is being conducted. Per the 2024-CTRulesAmdt, the clinical research organization must also forward the SAE/SADR report to CDSCO within 14 days of becoming aware of the event.

In the event of an SAE/SADR resulting in death, per the 2019-CTRules, the sponsor or the representative and the investigator must forward the SAE/SADR reports to the DCGI within 14 days of knowledge of this occurrence. The 2019-CTRules and IND-42 also indicate that the EC is also required to forward its report along with its opinion on financial compensation, if any, to be paid by the sponsor or the representative, to the DCGI within 30 days of the incident.

See Table 5 of the 2019-CTRules for details on the data elements required for reporting SAEs/SADRs that occur during a clinical trial.

See the Insurance & Compensation section for additional information on sponsor compensation requirements.

Investigator Responsibilities

As indicated in the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and IND-42, the investigator must report all SAEs/SADRs to the DCGI, the sponsor or the representative, and the EC, within 24 hours of occurrence. Per the 2019-CTRules, in the event that the investigator fails to report any SAE/SADR within the stipulated period, the investigator is then required to provide reasons for the delay to the DCGI along with the SAE/SADR report for the DCGI’s approval.

In addition, per the G-ICMR, the investigator must submit a report to the DCGI explaining how the SAE/SADR was related to the research within 14 days. According to the 2019-CTRules, the investigator must also promptly report to the EC all changes in the clinical trial activities and all unanticipated problems involving risks to human research participants or others.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

As per Notice25Feb21, the investigator, the sponsor or the representative, and the EC must report all SAEs electronically via the SUGAM portal (IND-59). However, follow-up reports pertaining to SAE reports submitted prior to March 14, 2021, will continue to be accepted in paper form. Refer to IND-59 for the SUGAM user manual and video tutorials. See also IND-42 for instructions on how to submit SAE reports (referred to as Due Analysis Reports) via IND-59. The G-ICMR further states that the investigator may report SAEs/SADRs to the EC through email or fax communication (including on non-working days). Refer to IND-37 for the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)'s EC Serious Adverse Event Reporting Format (Clinical Trials).

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

As described in the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, the Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), who heads the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO), requires the sponsor (applicant) to submit a six (6)-month status report for each clinical trial electronically via the CDSCO’s SUGAM portal (IND-59). The report should clarify whether the trial is ongoing, completed, or terminated. In the case of termination, detailed reasons for such termination must be communicated to the DCGI within 30 working days of the termination. In addition, per the 2019-CTRules, an ethics committee (EC) may periodically request study progress reports from the investigators.

As delineated in the 2019-CTRules, sponsors are also required to submit an annual status report for the clinical trial to the DCGI.

The 2019-CTRules further specifies that in cases where trials have been prematurely discontinued for any reason, including a lack of commercial interest in pursuing the new drug application (NDA), the sponsor should submit a summary report within three (3) months. The summary report should provide a brief description of the study, the number of participants exposed to the drug, dose/duration of exposure, details of adverse drug reactions, if any, and the reason for the study’s discontinuation or non-pursuit of the NDA.

See IND-35 for a Checklist of Notification for Annual Status Report documentation requirements to be included in a global clinical trial application.

Final Report

The final report should comply with the format and content guidelines listed in the 2019-CTRules as follows:

Title page
Study synopsis (1 to 2 pages)
List of abbreviations and definitions
Table of contents
EC approval letter(s)
Study team introduction
Study objective
Investigational plan
Trial participants
Efficacy evaluation
Safety evaluation
Discussion and overall conclusion
List of references
Appendices
See the 2019-CTRules for more detailed information on preparing the final report.

See IND-35 for a checklist of documentation requirements to be included in a global clinical trial application pertaining to end of clinical trial notification.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Note: The SUGAM Portal is not accessible outside of India.

As per the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, a sponsor (applicant) is defined as an individual, a company, or an institution that takes responsibility for the initiation, management, or financing of a clinical study. The G-ICMR further states that an investigator who independently initiates and takes full responsibility for a trial automatically assumes the role of a sponsor.

Although not specified in the 2019-CTRules, IND-46 notes that a foreign sponsor should appoint a local representative or contract research organization to fulfill local responsibilities , must document the transfer of duties, and is ultimately still responsible for the data quality and integrity.

Additionally, as delineated in the 2024-CTRulesAmdt, a clinical research organization is defined as a sponsor or a body (commercial, academic, or from another category), which is owned by an individual or an organization with a legal entity status, and to which the sponsor may delegate or transfer in writing, some or all of the tasks, duties, or obligations related to a clinical trial or bioavailability or bioequivalence study.

Per the 2024-CTRulesAmdt and Notice4Mar25, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW) also requires clinical research organizations to register with the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) prior to conducting any new drug or investigational new drug clinical trial or bioavailability or bioequivalence study in human participants.

Notice4Mar25 explains that the registration should occur via the SUGAM portal (IND-59). See 2024-CTRulesAmdt for detailed registration requirements, and see Notice4Mar25 for the accompanying user manual. IND-83 also provides useful information.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Note: The SUGAM Portal is not accessible outside of India.

Overview

As stated in the 2019-CTRules, all investigators must possess appropriate qualifications, training, and experience, and should conduct the trials in compliance with good clinical practice (GCP) and good laboratory practice (GLP). (See GCLP for the G-ICMR for good clinical laboratory practice (GCLP) guidelines, IND-31 for additional laboratory requirement information, and IND-76 for international GCLP guidelines. Investigators should also have access to investigational and treatment facilities as relevant to the protocol.

The 2024-CTRulesAmdt also notes that clinical research organizations must have adequate facilities, resources, and qualified and trained staff for handling any oversight of clinical trials and bioavailability or bioequivalence studies, and such staff must be trained regularly to update their skills. See the 2024-CTRulesAmdt for additional clinical research organization requirements.

In addition, applications to add a clinical trial site and/or to change a principal investigator should be submitted via the SUGAM portal (IND-59) for clinical trials of biological products (vaccine and rDNA) (per Notice24Feb25), as well as for global clinical trials, new drug clinical trials, and trials of subsequent new drugs, investigational new drugs, fixed dose combinations, and bioavailability and bioequivalence studies (per Notice26Dec24). See the Submission Process and Timeline of Review sections for submission and timeline requirements.

Per the 2019-CTRules, prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s)/institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor (applicant) should provide the involved parties with the protocol and an up-to-date investigator’s brochure and allow them sufficient time to review this documentation. The sponsor must also define and allocate all study-related duties and responsibilities to the respective identified person(s) and organization(s) prior to initiating the study.

Notice2Dec19 also states that the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) is preparing a comprehensive database of clinical trial sites and investigators involved in the conduct of global clinical trials in different therapeutic categories by collecting information from various sources. The first phase includes an Excel spreadsheet of sites and investigators involved in global clinical trials (IND-26).

See also IND-28 for the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)’s research conduct policies.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

Although not specified in the 2019-CTRules, IND-46 notes that a foreign sponsor should appoint a local representative or contract research organization to fulfill local responsibilities, must document the transfer of duties, and is ultimately still responsible for the data quality and integrity.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

While there are no general requirements for establishing a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB), the G-Children recommends that a DSMB be strongly considered for research involving children in emergency situations.

Multicenter Studies

As delineated in the G-ICMR, in the case of multicenter research studies, all of the participating study sites are required to obtain approval from their respective ethics committees (ECs), which includes the option of each site choosing to accept the review/approval of a primary EC. The study sites also typically follow a common protocol to avoid duplication of effort, wastage of time, and communication issues. See the G-ICMR for additional participating site requirements when a primary EC is selected for common EC review. Also, see the Scope of Review section for additional details.

Further, per the G-ICMR, if a multicenter trial is going to be conducted, the sponsor may organize a coordinating committee or select coordinating investigators. The sponsor must also conduct training for investigators in ethics, GCPs, standard operating procedures (SOPs), and study protocols.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Insurance

The G-ICMR specifies that the sponsor (applicant) should provide insurance coverage or a provision in the budget for possible compensation for trial-related injuries. The G-ICMR also states that it is preferable to have the insurance certificate and the policy for study participants. Further, the policy should explain the conditions of coverage, date of commencement, and expiration date for risk coverage (if applicable). In addition, institutional mechanisms must be established to allow for insurance coverage of trial-related or unrelated illnesses (ancillary care).

The 2019-CTRules states that the ethics committee (EC) also requires a copy of the insurance policy or details regarding compensation for participation and for serious adverse events (SAEs) occurring during the study as part of its submission review process.

With regard to indemnity coverage, the G-ICMR states that an indemnity policy must be included in the documentation for EC review. The policy should clearly indicate the conditions of coverage, date of commencement, and coverage expiration date, if applicable.

Compensation

Injury or Death

In accordance with the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, the sponsor is responsible for providing compensation to research participants and/or their legal heir(s) in the event of trial-related injuries, permanent disability, or death. Per the G-ICMR, in the event the investigator/institution becomes the sponsor in a clinical trial, it is the host institution’s responsibility to provide compensation for research-related injury or harm as determined by the ethics committee (EC).

The 2019-CTRules further notes that the sponsor is responsible for compensating the research participant and/or the legal heir(s) if the trial-related injury, death, or permanent disability to a participant is specifically related to any of the following reasons:

Adverse effects of an investigational product (IP)
Any trial procedures involved in the study
A violation of the approved protocol, scientific misconduct, or negligence by the sponsor, the representative, or the investigator
Failure of the IP to provide the intended therapeutic effect where, the standard care, though available, was not provided to the participant per the protocol
Not providing the required standard care, though available to the participant per the protocol in the placebo-controlled trial
Adverse effects due to concomitant medication excluding standard care, necessitated as part of the approved protocol
Adverse effect on the child in-utero due to a parent’s participation in a trial
Any clinical trial procedures involved in the study leading to a serious adverse event (SAE/serious adverse drug reaction (SADR))
Per the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, the sponsor must also ensure that participants who suffer any trial-related injuries be provided with free medical treatment for such injuries as long as required per the opinion of the investigator (and the EC per the G-ICMR), or until such time it is established that the injury is not related to the clinical trial, whichever is earlier. Per the 2019-CTRules, if the sponsor or the representative fails to provide medical management, the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO)’s Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), after a hearing, must issue a written order to suspend or cancel the study or restrict the sponsor, including the representative, from conducting any further clinical trials or taking any other action for such period deemed appropriate for this case.

In the case of a trial-related injury, the 2019-CTRules, IND-31, and the 2024-CTRulesAmdt state that the sponsor or the clinical research organization is required to provide complete medical management and compensation to the participant within 30 days of receiving an order from the DCGI. In the event of permanent injury or death, the sponsor or the clinical research organization is required to provide compensation to the participant or to the legal representative/guardian within 30 days of receiving the DCGI’s order. According to IND-31, compensation and medical management requirements are also applicable in the case of injury or death occurring during an academic trial.

The 2019-CTRules explains that in the case of an SAE resulting in death, the DCGI must constitute an independent expert committee to review the incident and make its recommendations to the DCGI for the cause of death and to provide a quantum of compensation. The sponsor or the representative and the investigator must forward their reports, after due analysis, to the DCGI and the head of the institution where the trial was conducted within 14 days of the occurrence. The EC must forward its report along with its opinion on financial compensation, if any, to be paid by the sponsor or the representative within 30 days of receiving the investigator’s report. The DCGI, in turn, must forward the sponsor, investigator, and EC reports to the expert committee chairperson. Following its review, the expert committee must make its recommendations to the DCGI as to the cause of the SAE resulting in death and the quantum of compensation within 60 days from receiving the DCGI’s submission. The DCGI must then consider the expert committee’s recommendations and issue an order within 90 days to the sponsor or the representative specifying the quantum of compensation required to be paid within 30 days of receiving the order.

In the case of an SAE/SADR resulting in permanent disability or any injury other than death, the 2019-CTRules indicates that the sponsor or the representative and the investigator must forward their reports, after due analysis, to the DCGI, the EC chairperson, and the head of the institution where the trial has been conducted within 14 days of the occurrence. The EC, after due analysis, must forward its report along with its opinion on financial compensation, if any, to the DCGI within 30 days of the event occurrence. The DCGI, in turn, must determine the cause of the injury and issue an order, with the option to constitute an independent expert committee, within 60 days of receipt of the report. The DCGI must issue an order within 90 days of receiving the report indicating the quantum of compensation to be paid by the sponsor or the representative within 30 days of receipt of this order.

In the case of an injury not being permanent in nature, per the 2019-CTRules, compensation should be commensurate with the participant’s loss of wages.

Per the 2019-CTRules, in the event that a sponsor or the representative fails to provide compensation to a research participant for trial-related injuries, or to the legal heir(s) in case of death, the DCGI must, after giving an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed by a written order, suspend or cancel the clinical trial, or restrict the sponsor or the representative from conducting any further clinical trials in India or taking any other action deemed fit given the circumstances.

See the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR for detailed information on terms of compensation payment.

Trial Participation

The G-ICMR explains that participants may also be compensated for their time and other expenses (e.g., loss of wages, food supplies, and travel). The EC should approve all payments, reimbursement, and medical services provided. Per the G-ICMR, participants should not be required to pay for any expenses incurred beyond routine clinical care and which are research related including patient work-ups, or interventions associated with treatment. If there are provisions, participants may receive additional medical services at no further cost.

Post-Trial Access

The 2019-CTRules and IND-31 explain that the investigator may recommend the sponsor provide post-trial access to the investigational product (IP) free of cost to the participant for such period as deemed necessary by the investigator and the EC. The sponsor must obtain DCGI approval to initiate this plan. The investigator’s recommendation will be based on the following conditions:

If the trial is being conducted for an indication for which no alternative therapy is available, and the IP has been determined to be beneficial
The participant or the legal representative/guardian has consented in writing to use the post-trial IP, and has certified and declared in writing, along with the investigator, that the sponsor must have no liability for post-trial use of the IP
Additionally, per the G-ICMR, the benefits accruing from research should be made accessible to individuals, communities and populations whenever relevant. The EC should consider the need for an a priori agreement between the researchers and sponsors regarding the following:

Efforts should be made to communicate the findings of the research study to the individuals/communities wherever relevant
The research team should make plans wherever applicable for post-research access and sharing of academic or intervention benefits with the participants, including those in the control group
Post-research access arrangements or other care must be described in the study protocol so that the EC may consider such arrangements during its review
G-ICMR further states that if an investigational drug is to be given to a participant post-trial, appropriate regulatory approvals should be in place. In studies with restricted scope, such as student projects, post study benefit to the participants may not be feasible, but conscious efforts should be made by the institution to take steps to continue to support and give better care to the participants.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

In accordance with the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, the sponsor (applicant) is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol, good clinical practice (GCP) guidelines, and all applicable laws and regulations. Per 2024-CTRulesAmdt, clinical research organizations must also implement QA and QC as per well-documented SOPs, the protocol, GCP guidelines, the 2019-CTRules, and the 2024-CTRulesAmdt provisions.

Monitoring Requirements

Per the 2024-CTRulesAmdt, clinical research organizations must ensure that clinical trials and bioavailability or bioequivalence studies are adequately monitored and the trial or study related responsibilities transferred to it, partially or fully, by the sponsor are carried out effectively and efficiently.

As per the 2019-CTRules and the 2024-CTRulesAmdt, the sponsor or the clinical research organization must permit clinical trial site inspections by officers authorized by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO)’s Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI). The officers may enter the premises and clinical trial site with or without prior notice to verify compliance with GCP guidelines, and to inspect, search, or seize any record, statistical result, document, investigational drug, and other related material. The sponsor or clinical research organization must also reply to inquiries raised by the inspecting authority in relation to the conduct of the trial.

In addition, as part of its QA system, the 2019-CTRules notes that investigator(s) may provide periodic study progress reports (PSUR), or regulatory officials or sponsor-designated authorized representatives may provide monitoring and internal audit reports to the ethics committee (EC) to support its recurring clinical trial reviews. An audit certificate may be issued, if available.

Furthermore, the 2019-CTRules requires the investigator to sign an undertaking indicating agreement to maintain adequate and accurate records and to make those records available for audit or inspection by the sponsor, the EC, CDSCO, or their authorized representatives, in accordance with regulatory provisions and GCP guidelines. The investigator must agree to fully cooperate with any study-related audit conducted by regulatory officials or authorized representatives of the sponsor.

See IND-35 for a checklist of PSUR documentation requirements to be included in a global clinical trial application, and IND-34 for the DCGI’s GCP Inspection Checklist.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

As delineated in the 2019-CTRules and the 2024-CTRulesAmdt, when the sponsor or a clinical research organization fails to comply with any provisions of the DCA-DCR, the 2019-CTRules, and the 2024-CTRulesAmdt, the DCGI may, after giving an opportunity to show cause and after affording an opportunity of being heard, suspend or cancel a clinical trial. The sponsor or the clinical research organization may appeal the DCGI’s decision within 60 working days of receipt of the order.

Further, per the 2019-CTRules, in case of studies prematurely discontinued for any reason, including lack of commercial interest in pursuing the new drug application, the sponsor should submit a summary report within three (3) months. The summary report should provide a brief description of the study, the number of patients exposed to the drug, dose and duration of exposure, details of adverse drug reactions, if any, and the reason for discontinuation of the study or non-pursuit of the new drug application. In case of termination of any clinical trial, the detailed reasons for such termination must be communicated to the DCGI within 30 working days of such termination. The 2024-CTRulesAmdt also notes that a clinical research organization should provide detailed reasons to the DCGI immediately in the case of premature termination of any study.

See IND-35 for a checklist of premature study termination documentation requirements to be included in a global clinical trial application.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

No information is currently available on electronic data processing systems.

Records Management

Per the 2019-CTRules, the sponsor (applicant) must keep a record of new drugs manufactured and persons to whom the drugs have been supplied for clinical trial or bioavailability and bioequivalence study or for examination, testing, and analysis. The licensed sponsor must also maintain records of any imported new drug or substance that indicates the quantity of drug imported, used, and disposed of in any manner including related documentation.

In addition, per the 2024-CTRulesAmdt, clinical research organizations must accurately maintain complete data, documentation, and other related records (written documents, electronic, magnetic or optical records, scans, etc.). This includes checking and ensuring the essential documents required for the conduct of the trial are properly maintained by the investigators. All documentation and communication must be dated, filed, and preserved safely for a period of five (5) years after the study’s completion, or for at least two (2) years after the expiration date of the new drug or investigational new drug batch studies, whichever is later. See the 2024-CTRulesAmdt for more details.

See the Scope of Review section for information on ethics committee management of clinical trial related records.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile) 

On November 14, 2025, India’s Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) issued the Digital Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025, bringing the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 into effect. See MeitY’s Digital Personal Data Protection Rules 2025 page and the MeitY press release for more details.

Responsible Parties

For the purposes of data protection regulation in India, the ITAct, the ITActAmend, and the IT-SPDIRules delineate responsibilities of the “body corporate.” The body corporate as defined by the ITAct, the ITActAmend, and the IT-SPDIRules refers to any company including a firm, sole proprietorship, or other association of individuals engaged in commercial or professional activities. The IT-SPDIRules further explains that the body corporate or any person on its behalf is the entity responsible for collecting, receiving, possessing, storing, dealing with, or handling personal information, including sensitive personal data and information.

Data Protection

Data protection in India is currently regulated by the ITAct, the ITActAmend, and the IT-SPDIRules. Per the IT-SPDIRules, the body corporate must provide a privacy policy for the handling of or dealing with personal information including sensitive personal data or information. The IT-SPDIRules specifies that the body corporate must ensure this policy is available for view by the information providers under a lawful contract. The policy must be published on the body corporate’s or its representative’s website and provide the following:

Clear and easily accessible statements of its practices and policies
The type of personal information including sensitive personal data or information collected
The purpose of collection and usage of such information
Disclosure of information including sensitive personal data or information
Reasonable security practices and procedures
Please refer to the IT-SPDIRules for detailed requirements on implementing security practices and procedures and collecting, disclosing, and transferring sensitive personal data or information.

Pursuant to the G-LabValidTest, laboratory validation testing is used to ensure that laboratory test data and results are accurate, consistent, and precise, and may include tests that are conducted using residual, archived, unlinked, and anonymous biological samples such as blood, urine, tissue, cells, saliva, DNA, etc. The G-LabValidTest indicates that if the biological samples are linked to different types of personal identifiers (name, address, etc.) or with health-related data (chronic illnesses, prior hospital stays), and other types of potentially sensitive data (travel history, family history), there is a risk for breach of confidentiality and such samples are not recommended for laboratory validation testing without ethics committee (EC) approval. The investigator undertaking laboratory validation testing must also keep the EC informed regarding use of leftover, archived, or anonymous samples. The laboratories involved in the validation of tests/methods, may be exempted from ethical approval when using leftover archived and anonymized samples.

See also the G-AI-BiomedRes for data privacy and confidentiality guidelines in biomedical and health research involving artificial intelligence-based tools and technologies.

In addition, the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (also known as the DPDPA) was enacted on August 11, 2023, with an effective date to be determined by the Indian Government. India’s Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) has also drafted the Draft Digital Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025 (also known as the DPDP Rules) to facilitate the implementation of the DPDPA. The effective date of the DPDP Rules has also not yet been determined. The ClinRegs team will update the Personal Data Protection section when more information becomes available. See IND-84 and IND-85 for additional information.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

As set forth in the IT-SPDIRules, the body corporate or its representative must obtain consent in writing through letter, fax, or email from the provider of the sensitive personal data or information regarding the purpose of usage before collection of such information. The IT-SPDIRules further states that while collecting information directly from the information provider, reasonable steps must be taken to ensure that the information provider receives details regarding the following:

The fact that the information is being collected
The purpose for which the information is being collected
The intended recipients of the information; and
The name and address of the agency that is collecting the information, and the agency that will retain the information
Per the IT-SPDIRules, the body corporate or its representative, must provide an option to the information provider to withhold the requested data or information prior to the collection of information including sensitive personal data or information. The information provider must, at any time, also have the option to withdraw consent given earlier to the body corporate or its representative. This withdrawal of consent must be sent in writing.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Indian clinical trials, a freely given, written informed consent is required to be obtained from each participant to comply with the requirements set forth in the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and the G-Children.

As per the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, prior to beginning a clinical trial, the investigator is required to obtain ethics committee (EC) approval for the informed consent form (ICF) and the patient information sheet. This documentation must also be supplied to the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO)’s Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), prior to the trial’s initiation. The ICF and patient information sheet are ultimately integrated into one (1) document referred to as the ICF. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.)

The 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and the G-Children specify that investigator(s) should provide detailed study information to the research participant or the legal representative/guardian. The ICF content should be briefly and clearly presented orally, and in writing, and in a manner that is easy to understand, commensurate with the comprehension level of the participants, and without coercion or unduly influencing a potential participant to enroll in the trial. Per the G-ICMR, the ICF language should not only be scientifically accurate and simple, but should also be sensitive to the participant’s social and cultural background. In addition, the participant or the legal representative/guardian, should be given adequate time to consider whether to participate. The consent should also be given voluntarily and not be obtained under duress or coercion of any sort or by offering any inducements.

The G-ICMR also states that, in the case of differently abled participants, such as those with physical, neurological, or mental disabilities, appropriate methods should be used to enhance the participants’ understanding (e.g., Braille for the visually impaired).

As delineated in the 2019-CTRules, investigator(s) must obtain an audio-video (AV) recording of the informed consent process for vulnerable participants in clinical trials for a new chemical or molecular entity, including the procedure of providing information to the participant and their understanding of the consent. This AV recording should be retained in the investigator’s files. In cases where clinical trials are conducted on anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and anti-leprosy drugs, the investigator(s) must only obtain an audio recording of the informed consent process. The investigator(s) is also required to retain the audio recording for their records.

For specific guidelines regarding gene therapy and stem cell therapy clinical trials, see G-GeneThrpy and G-StemCellRes.

Re-Consent

According to the G-ICMR and the G-Children, investigator(s) are required to renew the informed consent of each participant if there are any changes in the ICF related to the study conditions or research procedures, or if new information becomes available during the trial.

Per the G-ICMR and the G-Children, re-consent is applicable in cases in which a participant regains consciousness from an unconscious state and/or recovers mental capacity to understand the research study. If such an event is expected, then procedures to address this circumstance should be explained clearly in the ICF.

The G-ICMR and the G-Children explain that re-consent is required in the following situations:

New information pertaining to the study becomes available that has implications for the participant(s) or that changes the benefit and risk ratio
A research participant who is unconscious regains consciousness or suffered loss of mental competence and regains the ability to understand the research implications
A child becomes an adult during the study, or the parent/legal guardian have changed
Research requires a long-term follow up or an extension
There is a change in treatment modality, procedures, site visits, data collection methods, or tenure of participation which may impact a participant’s decision to continue in the research
There is possibility of identity disclosure through data presentation or photographs (this should be camouflaged adequately) in an upcoming publication
Future research may be carried out on stored biological samples if not anonymized
The partner/spouse may also be required to give additional re-consent in some of the above cases.

Language Requirements

As stated in the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, the ICF should be written in English and/or in a vernacular language that the participant is able to understand.

Documenting Consent

The G-ICMR and the G-Children specify that the participant or the participant’s legal representative/guardian must sign and date the ICF. If the participant is incapable of giving an informed consent, the legal representative/guardian should sign and date the ICF. Where the participant or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, verbal consent should be obtained in the presence of and countersigned by an impartial witness.

Per the G-ICMR, if the participant or the legal representative/guardian cannot sign, a thumb impression must be obtained. In addition, the investigator(s) who administers the consent should also sign and date the ICF. As stated in the G-ICMR and the G-Children, when written consent as a signature or thumb impression is not possible, verbal consent may be taken with the EC’s approval, in the presence of an impartial witness who should sign and date the consent document, or through an AV recording. Per the G-ICMR, the ICF may also be administered and documented electronically, as long as the EC approves the process first.

As described in the G-ICMR, the following special situations may also arise in administering consent:

The gatekeeper, a group’s head/leader or the culturally appropriate authorities, may provide permission on the group’s behalf in writing or via AV recording, which should be witnessed
Community consent is required for certain populations in order for participants to be permitted to participate in the research
According to the G-ICMR and the G-Children, a copy of the signed ICF and the patient information sheet should be given to the participant or the legal representative/guardian. Per the G-Children, the investigator should also keep a signed copy of the ICF.

Waiver of Consent

As specified in the G-ICMR and the G-Children, the investigator(s) can apply to the EC for a waiver of consent if the research involves less than minimal risk to participants and the waiver will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the participants. In addition, per the G-ICMR, the EC may grant a waiver of consent in the following situations:

Research cannot practically be carried out without the waiver and the waiver is scientifically justified
Retrospective studies, where the participants are de-identified or cannot be contacted
Research on anonymized biological samples/data
Certain types of public health studies/surveillance programs/program evaluation studies
Research on data available in the public domain, or
Research during humanitarian emergencies and disasters, when the participant may not be in a position to give consent. An attempt should be made to obtain the participant’s consent as soon as possible
Refer to the Children/Minors section for information on waivers involving children.

See the G-ICMR, IND-5, and IND-27 for additional information on informed consent requirements.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Per the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and the G-Children, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study involves research and an explanation of its nature and purpose
The expected duration of the participant’s participation
Any benefits reasonably expected from the research to the participant or others; if no benefit is expected, the participant should be made aware of this
The disclosure of specific appropriate alternative procedures or therapies available to the participant
The mechanism by which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained and who will have access to the participant’s medical records
An explanation about whom to contact for trial-related queries, participant rights, and in the event of any injury
The policy on compensation and/or medical treatment(s) available to the participant in the event of a trial-related injury, disability, or death
Participation is voluntary, the participant can withdraw from the study at any time, and refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled
Any reasonably foreseeable risks or discomforts to the participant resulting from participation
Approximate number of participants enrolled in the study
Additional requirements listed in the G-ICMR and the G-Children include:

Foreseeable extent of information on possible current and future uses of the biological material and of the data to be generated from the research (e.g., storage period of sample/data; probability of material being used for secondary purposes; whether material is to be shared with others; participant’s right to prevent use of their biological sample(s) at any time during or after the study; risk of discovery of biologically sensitive information and provisions to safeguard confidentiality)
Publication, if any, including photographs and pedigree charts
Payment/reimbursement for participation and incidental expenses depending on the type of study
Insurance coverage, if any, for research-related or other adverse events
If there is a possibility that the research could lead to any stigmatizing condition (e.g., HIV and genetic disorders, provision for pre-test and post-test counseling)
Post-research plan/benefit sharing for biological material research and/or if data leads to commercialization
Additional requirements listed in the 2019-CTRules include:

The procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The investigational product (IP) may fail to achieve the intended therapeutic effect
In the case of a placebo-controlled trial, the placebo administered to the participant(s) must not have any therapeutic effect
The anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
The participant’s responsibilities in participating in the trial
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without consent
The consequences of a participant’s decision to withdraw from the research, and procedures for orderly withdrawal by the participant
The participant or the legal representative/guardian will be notified in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the study which may affect the participant’s willingness to continue
The particular treatment or procedure may involve risks to the participant (or to the embryo or fetus, if the participant is or may become pregnant), which are currently unforeseeable
Additional costs to the participant that may result from participating in the study
Any other pertinent information
Clinical trial treatment schedule(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
See the Vulnerable Populations and Consent for Specimen sections for further information.

For specific guidelines regarding gene therapy and stem cell therapy clinical trials, see G-GeneThrpy and G-StemCellRes.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, India’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. The G-ICMR upholds the Declaration of Helsinki (IND-63). The 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and the G-Children state that a participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As stated in the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and the G-Children, the participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As per the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and the G-Children, a potential research participant or the legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation or treatment in the case of injury, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As described in the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and the G-Children, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. The 2019-CTRules also states that it is the responsibility of the investigator(s) to safeguard the confidentiality of research data to protect the identity and records of research participants.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and the G-Children state that the research participant or the legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the investigator(s) and the ethics committee (EC) to address trial-related inquiries and/or to appeal against a violation of the participant’s rights.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The G-ICMR clearly states that a research participant’s right to safety and protection of health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

See the G-ICMR and IND-27 for additional information on informed consent requirements. Refer to the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.

See also the G-AI-BiomedRes for guidelines on safeguarding participants rights in biomedical and health research involving artificial intelligence-based tools and technologies.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Children in Emergency Situations

Per the G-Children, research involving children in emergency situations should only be carried out when it is scientifically justified and cannot be conducted outside this setting. The ethics committee(s) (EC) should review and approve these studies as well as the proposed timeframe in which formal consent will be obtained. If consent cannot be obtained in an emergency, deferred consent is suggested. Deferred consent involves giving minimum information verbally, followed by full details and formal consent later. If the parent/legal guardian is unavailable or unable to give consent, another individual, such as the participant’s doctor or a person nominated by the healthcare provider, can give consent. However, the doctor or a person nominated by the healthcare provider may not be involved in the research. It is recommended that a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) be strongly considered for these types of studies. See the Children/Minors section for additional pediatric informed consent requirements.

Moreover, per the G-Children, if a child’s parent/legal guardian refuses to give consent once their child is stabilized, the child should not be included in the research, and no further research related procedures/data collection should be done. Additionally, the previously collected data obtained prior to the consent process should not be used without the parent's/legal guardian's permission.

Humanitarian Emergencies

As explained in the G-ICMR, during a humanitarian emergency or disaster, close attention should be paid to the effect of the emergency on perceptions of ethical questions, altered or increased vulnerabilities, provider-patient and researcher-participant relationships, and issues related to integrity of studies and ethical review processes. Obtaining valid informed consent in humanitarian emergencies is a challenge as the decisional capacity of the participants would be so low that they may not be able to differentiate between reliefs offered and research components. This should be very clearly distinguished during the informed consent process. Additional safeguards are required for participants due to their vulnerability, for example, counseling, psychological help, medical advice, and process of stakeholder consultation.

In addition, the G-ICMR indicates that the potential research participants might be under duress and traumatized. Researchers should be sensitive to this situation and are obligated to ensure that the informed consent process is conducted in a respectful manner. Researchers should strive to identify and address barriers to voluntary informed consent and not resort to inducements for research participation. The different roles of researchers, caregivers, and volunteer workers must always be clarified, and potential conflict of interest declared. If research involves vulnerable individuals (such as minors), then the legal representative/guardian should give consent. Additional protections might be required in special cases, for example, children with untraceable or deceased relatives. In these situations, consent should be obtained from an individual who is not part of the research team and who should be designated by the institution/agency conducting research.

For seeking a waiver of consent, the researchers should give the rationale justifying the waiver. The EC should approve such a waiver after careful discussion on the issue. Refer to the Documentation Requirements section for additional information on waivers of consent. When consent of the participant or the legal representative/guardian is not possible due to the situation, informed consent must be administered to the participant or the legal representative/guardian at a later stage, when the situation allows. However, this should be done only with the prior approval of the EC. See IND-5 for additional information on consent requirements during medical emergencies.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Overview

As set forth in the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, in all clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. The G-ICMR further describes vulnerable groups and individuals as those who may have an increased likelihood of incurring additional harm, as they may be relatively (or absolutely) incapable of protecting their own interests. According to the G-ICMR, vulnerable populations are characterized as individuals/communities with hierarchical relationships (e.g., prisoners, armed forces personnel, or staff and students at medical, nursing, or pharmacy academic institutions); economically and socially disadvantaged individuals (e.g., persons who are unemployed, abandoned, orphans, have language barriers, or cultural differences); persons below the poverty line; ethnic, religious, or sexual minority groups; tribal and marginalized communities; terminally ill patients or those suffering from stigmatizing or rare diseases; patients in emergency situations; institutionalized persons; homeless persons, nomads, or refugees; minors; women in special situations (e.g., pregnant or lactating women, those with poor decision-making powers, or poor access to healthcare); those with mental illness and cognitively impaired, differently abled, or mentally or physically disabled; or others incapable of personally giving consent.

Per the 2019-CTRules, the G-ICMR, and IND-21, ethics committees (ECs) should follow standard operating procedures to review proposals involving vulnerable populations. See also the G-ICMR for detailed safeguards that must be complied with when trials involving vulnerable populations are conducted. The G-ICMR also describes research principles that must be upheld during these trials and upholds the Declaration of Helsinki (IND-63). See also the G-AI-BiomedRes for guidelines on safeguarding participants rights in biomedical and health research involving artificial intelligence-based tools and technologies, especially those participants from underrepresented and vulnerable populations.

See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations. See also IND-5 for additional information on consent requirements for vulnerable populations.

For specific guidelines regarding gene therapy and stem cell therapy clinical trials, see the G-GeneThrpy and the G-StemCellRes.

Terminally Ill Patients

Per the G-ICMR, terminally ill patients or patients seeking new treatments are vulnerable as they are ready to give consent for any intervention that could help them. The EC should carefully review protocols and recruitment procedures for these studies and comply with the following requirements:

Additional monitoring should be done to detect any adverse event as soon as possible
A benefit-risk assessment should be performed that considers the potential participant’s perception of benefits and risks
Post-trial access to the medication
Indigenous Peoples

The G-ICMR states that research on tribal populations should only be conducted if it is of a specific therapeutic, diagnostic, and preventative nature with appropriate benefits to the tribal population. A competent administrative authority’s approval, such as the tribal welfare commissioner or the district collector, should be obtained prior to an investigator entering the area. Whenever possible, it is desirable to seek the help of government functionaries/local bodies or registered, non-governmental organizations who work closely with the tribal groups and have their confidence. The tribal leader, or other culturally appropriate authority may serve as the gatekeeper from whom permission to enter and interact should be obtained. A participant’s consent should be taken along as well as consulting with community elders and individuals who know the local language/dialect of the tribal population, and in the presence of appropriate witnesses. Additional precautions should be taken to avoid including children, pregnant women, and elderly people belonging to particularly vulnerable tribal groups. Benefit sharing with the tribal group should also be ensured for any research done using tribal knowledge that may have the potential for commercialization.

Elderly Persons

Permission to conduct clinical trials in geriatric patients must comply with the requirements listed in the Required Elements section. According to 2019-CTRules, geriatric patients should be included in Phase II and Phase III clinical trials at the sponsor’s (the applicant’s) recommendation, in the following circumstances:

The disease intended to be treated is typically a disease of aging
The population to be treated is known to include substantial numbers of geriatric patients
There is specific reason to expect that conditions common in the elderly are likely to be encountered
The new drug is likely to alter the geriatric patient’s response (with regard to safety or efficacy) compared with that of the non-geriatric patient
Persons in Dependent Groups

As indicated in the G-ICMR, while reviewing protocols involving participants who are engaged in subordinate or dependent relationships, the EC must ensure the following:

Participant enrollment is specifically relevant to the research questions and is not merely a matter of convenience
Extra efforts are required to ensure the autonomy of these individuals is respected, and that they are able to freely decide to participate or deny consent and/or later withdraw from the study without fear of any negative repercussions on their care
Mechanisms to avoid coercion due to being part of an institution or hierarchy should be described in the protocol
Sexual Minorities and Sex Workers

Per the G-ICMR, sexual minorities and sex workers require additional protections as they are more vulnerable to privacy, confidentiality, stigma, discrimination, and exploitation issues during a research study. Research proposals should ensure the dignity of these participants is protected and that they have access to quality healthcare. Investigators should consult the community, if possible, prior to the proposal being finalized. It is also advised that a representative of the sexual minority group/lesbian/gay/bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community attend the EC meeting as a special invitee/member.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
As per the G-ICMR, children are individuals who have not obtained the legal age of consent, which is 18.

As stated in the G-ICMR, the 2019-CTRules, and the G-Children, in the case of pediatric clinical trials, participants are legally unable to provide written informed consent, and are dependent on their parents/legal guardians to assume responsibility for their participation in a research study.

However, as specified in the 2019-CTRules, all pediatric participants should be informed to the extent compatible with the child’s understanding, and if capable, the pediatric participant should sign and personally date the informed consent form (ICF). In these studies, the following requirements should be complied with:

Written informed consent should be obtained from the parent/legal guardian; however, all pediatric participants should be informed to the fullest extent possible about the study in a language and in terms that they are able to understand
Where appropriate, pediatric participants should additionally provide their assent to enroll in the study, and mature minors and adolescents should personally sign and date a separately designed written assent form
Although a participant’s wish to withdraw from a study must be respected, there may be circumstances in therapeutic studies for serious or life-threatening diseases in which, in the investigator’s and parent’s/legal guardian’s opinion, a pediatric patient’s welfare would be jeopardized by failing to participate in the study. In this situation, continued parental/legal guardian consent should be sufficient to allow participation in the study
The 2019-CTRules further specifies requirements for pediatric studies involving new drugs. These studies must take into account the following issues:

The timing of new drug pediatric studies will depend on the medicinal product, the type of disease being treated, safety considerations, and the efficacy and safety of available treatments
If the new drug is for diseases predominantly or exclusively affecting pediatric patients, clinical trial data should be generated in the pediatric population except for initial safety and tolerability data, which will usually be obtained in adults, unless such initial safety studies in adults would yield little useful information or expose them to inappropriate risk
If the new drug is intended to treat serious or life-threatening diseases, occurring in both adults and pediatric patients, for which there are currently no or limited therapeutic options, the pediatric population should be included in the clinical trials early, following assessment of initial safety data and reasonable evidence of potential benefit; in circumstances where this is not possible, lack of data should be justified in detail
If the new drug has a potential for use in pediatric patients, pediatric studies should be conducted
Pediatric studies should include clinical trials, relative bioequivalence comparisons between pediatric and adult formulations, and pharmacokinetic studies for dose selection across the age ranges of pediatric patients in whom the drug is likely to be used
If the new drug is a major therapeutic advance for the pediatric population, studies should begin early in the drug development, and this data should be submitted with the new drug application
The reviewing ethics committee (EC) should also include members who are knowledgeable about pediatric, ethical, clinical, and psychosocial issues.

Refer to the 2019-CTRules for detailed pediatric study requirements.

Per the G-ICMR, the EC should also perform a benefit-risk assessment to determine whether there is a need to implement additional safeguards/protections to conduct a study involving children. The EC should consider the circumstances of the children to be enrolled in the study including their age, health status, and other factors and potential benefits to other children with the same disease or condition, or to society as a whole. In addition, the G-Children should be consulted for detailed EC assessment criteria to be used to evaluate research studies involving children.

As per the G-Children, following EC approval of the protocol, the informed consent requirement for children may be waived in the following circumstances:

When it is impractical to conduct research since confidentiality of personally identifiable information has to be maintained throughout the study (e.g., a study on the disease/burden of HIV/AIDS)
Research is carried out on publicly available information, documents, records, works, performances, reviews, quality assurance studies, archival materials or third-party interviews, etc.
Research on anonymized biological samples, leftover samples after clinical investigation/research, cell lines, or cell free derivatives (e.g., viral isolates, DNA or RNA from recognized institutions or qualified investigators, samples or data from repositories or registries, etc.) provided permission for future research on these samples has been taken in the previous ICF
In emergency situations when no surrogate consent can be taken
Retrospective studies, where the participants are de-identified or cannot be contacted
Assent Requirements

As delineated in the G-ICMR, the 2019-CTRules, and the G-Children, if the pediatric participant has the capacity for assent, the participant’s affirmative assent is required to participate in a study according to their developmental level and decision-making capacity. Per the 2019-CTRules, mature minors and adolescents should personally sign and date a separately designed written assent form. According to the G-ICMR, mature minors are those from age seven (7) up to age 18.

The G-Children also explains that in addition to the children’s developmental level and capability of understanding, the assent process and form should also take into account their age, maturity, reading level, independence, autonomy as well as cultural and social factors. For children between ages seven (7) and 11, oral assent must be obtained in the presence of their parent/legal guardian. For children between ages 12 and 18, written assent must be obtained.

Per the G-Children, a child’s dissent or refusal to participate must always be respected, and the child must be informed in an understandable manner that assent may be withdrawn at any time during the study. The EC may also issue a waiver of assent in the following circumstances:

If the research has the potential to directly benefit the child, and this benefit is only available through this study
If the research involves children with intellectual and other developmental disabilities, they may not have the developmental level and intellectual capability to give assent
For details and guidance on preparing and using an assent form, see the G-Children.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
As per the 2019-CTRules and the G-ICMR, clinical studies involving pregnant or nursing women and fetuses require additional safeguards to ensure that the research assesses the risks to the women and the fetuses. The following conditions are required for research to be conducted involving pregnant or nursing women or fetuses.

Per the 2019-CTRules:

Pregnant or nursing women should be included in clinical trials only when the drug is intended for use by pregnant or nursing women, fetuses, or nursing infants, and where the data generated from women who are not pregnant or nursing is unsuitable
Per the G-ICMR:

For studies related to pregnancy termination, only pregnant women who undergo Medical Termination of Pregnancy as per the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 can be included
The research should carry no more than minimal risk to the fetus or nursing infant and the research objective is to obtain new knowledge about the fetus, pregnancy, and lactation
Clinical trials involving pregnant or nursing women would be justified to ensure that these women are not deprived arbitrarily of the opportunity to benefit from investigations, drugs, vaccines, or other agents that promise therapeutic or preventive benefits
Research related to prenatal diagnostic techniques in pregnant women should be limited to detecting fetal abnormalities or genetic disorders as per the Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1994, amended in 2003, and not used to determine the sex of the fetus
Researchers must provide the ethics committee (EC) with proper justification for including pregnant and nursing women in trials designed to address the health needs of such women or their fetuses or nursing infants
If women of reproductive age are to be recruited, they should be informed of the potential risk to the fetus if they become pregnant, be asked to use an effective contraceptive method, and be told about the options available in case of failure of contraception
A woman who becomes pregnant must not automatically be removed from the study when there is no evidence showing potential harm to the fetus. The matter should be carefully reviewed, and she must be offered the option to withdraw or continue
If the female sexual partner of a male participant gets pregnant during the research study, the EC should review the protocol and informed consent form (ICF) to determine if a plan exists to document this event, and both the pregnant partner and fetus must also be followed for the outcome and reported in the study results
Pregnant women have the right to participate in clinical research relevant to their healthcare needs (e.g., gestational diabetes, pregnancy-induced hypertension, and HIV)
Benefit-risk assessment must be done at all stages for both the mother and the fetus
Research involving pregnant women and fetuses must only take place when the objective is to obtain new knowledge directly relevant to the fetus, the pregnancy, or lactation
Women should not be encouraged to discontinue nursing for the sake of participation in research except in those studies where breastfeeding is harmful to the infant
Appropriate studies on animals and non-pregnant individuals should have been completed, if applicable
Researchers should not participate in decision-making regarding any termination of a pregnancy
No procedural changes, which will cause greater than minimal risk to the woman or fetus, will be introduced into the procedure for terminating the pregnancy solely in the interest of the trial
When research is planned on sensitive topics (e.g., domestic violence, genetic disorders, and/or rape) confidentiality should be strictly maintained and privacy protected
Fetuses and Neonates

As described in the G-Children, study protocols involving neonates should take into consideration that this group is the most vulnerable within the pediatric population in terms of the risk of long-term effects of interventions, including developmental effects. ECs reviewing such proposed protocols should have an advisory member with expertise in neonatal research/care. ECs should scrutinize all proposed research for potential risks and weigh them against the possible benefits and ensure a competent person(s) conducts a proper scientific review of the protocol. In addition, when possible, older children should be studied before conducting studies in younger children and infants.

The consent of one (1) parent is also required for neonate studies where research exposes them to no or minimal risk, or in studies that offer the prospect of direct benefit to the participant. However, for studies that do not offer the prospect of direct benefit or are high-risk, consent from both parents is required. Exceptions to this requirement include the following:

Only one (1) parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child
One (1) parent is deceased, unknown, incompetent, or not available. In such cases, it is the duty of the investigators to provide adequate justification.
A parent who is a minor should not provide consent. If both parents are minors, then enrollment of such a baby should be avoided as much as possible. Investigator(s) should provide adequate justification to the EC to enroll such neonates for research. A legally acceptable representative should provide an informed consent in such situations.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
As noted in the G-ICMR, prisoners are included in the description of vulnerable populations due to their diminished autonomy caused by dependency or being under a hierarchical system.

The G-ICMR specifies that during the review process, the ethics committee (EC) must ensure compliance with the following:

Enrolling participants is specifically pertinent to the research questions and is not merely a matter of convenience
Extra efforts are made to respect the autonomy of these individuals because they are in a hierarchical position and may not be in a position to disagree to participate for fear of authority
It is possible for the participant to deny consent and/or later withdraw from the study without any negative repercussions on their care
Mechanisms to avoid coercion due to being part of an institution or hierarchy should be described in the protocol
Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
The G-ICMR states that, in the case of differently abled participants, such as those with physical, neurological, or mental disabilities, appropriate methods should be used to enhance the participants’ understanding. The G-ICMR also states that the presence of a mental disorder is not synonymous with incapacity of understanding or inability to provide informed consent. However, ethics committees (ECs) have special responsibilities when research is conducted on participants who are suffering from mental illness and/or cognitive impairment. ECs should exercise caution and require researchers to justify exceptions and their need to depart from the guidelines governing research. ECs should ensure that these exceptions are as minimal as possible and are clearly spelled out in the informed consent form. The G-ICMR also upholds the Declaration of Helsinki (IND-63).

As set forth in the MHA2017, every person, including a person with mental illness, must be deemed to have the capacity to make decisions regarding mental healthcare or treatment providing the person has the ability to engage in the following:

Understand the information that is relevant to make a decision on treatment, admission, or personal assistance
Appreciate any reasonably foreseeable consequence of a decision or lack of decision on the treatment, admission, or personal assistance, or
Communicate the decision by means of speech, expression, gesture, or any other means
Per MHA2017, information must be provided to a person with mental illness using simple and understandable language, sign language, visual aids, or any other means to enable the person to understand the information. In the case in which a person makes a decision regarding one’s mental healthcare or treatment that is perceived by others as inappropriate or wrong, that by itself, must not be interpreted as the person not having the capacity to make such a decision, as long as the person has the capacity to meet the above stated requirements.

MHA2017 further delineates that every person with mental illness who is not a minor must have the right to appoint a nominated representative. The nomination must be made in writing on plain paper with the person’s signature or thumb impression. The person appointed as nominated representative must not be a minor, be competent to discharge the duties or perform the assigned functions under the MHA2017, and give consent in writing to the mental health professional to discharge the person’s duties and perform the assigned functions. A person who has appointed an individual as the nominated representative may revoke or alter the appointment at any time. The appointment of a nominated representative, or the inability of a person with mental illness to appoint a nominated representative, must not be construed as the lack of capacity of the person to make decisions about mental healthcare or treatment. All persons with mental illness must have the capacity to make mental healthcare or treatment decisions but may require varying levels of support from their nominated representative to make decisions. When fulfilling responsibilities, the nominated representative must have the right to give or withhold consent for research under circumstances.

Pursuant to MHA2017, professionals conducting research must obtain free and informed consent from all persons with mental illness for participation in any research that involves interviewing the person, or any research that involves psychological, physical, chemical, or medicinal interventions. In the case of research involving psychological, physical, chemical, or medicinal interventions to be conducted on a person who is unable to give free and informed consent, but does not resist participation in such research, permission to conduct such research must be obtained from the appropriate State Authority. The State Authority may allow the research to proceed based on informed consent being obtained from the person’s nominated representative if the State Authority is satisfied that the following criteria are met:

The proposed research cannot be performed on persons who are capable of giving free and informed consent
The proposed research is necessary to promote the mental health of the population represented by the person
The purpose of the proposed research is to obtain knowledge relevant to the particular mental health needs of persons with mental illness
A full disclosure of the interests of the persons and organizations conducting the proposed research is made and there is no conflict of interest involved, and,
The proposed research follows all the national and international guidelines and regulations concerning the conduct of such research, and ethical approval has been obtained from the institutional EC where such research is to be conducted
A research-based study of the case notes of a person who is unable to give informed consent will be permitted so long as the anonymity of the person is secured. In addition, the person with mental illness or the nominated representative who gives informed consent for participation in any research under MHA2017 may withdraw consent at any time during the research period.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
As delineated in the 2019-CTRules, an investigational product (IP) is defined as the pharmaceutical formulation of an active ingredient or a placebo (including the comparator product) being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial.

The 2019-CTRules further defines an investigational new drug as a new chemical or biological entity or a product having a therapeutic indication, but which has never been tested before on human participants.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Note: The SUGAM Portal is not accessible outside of India.

Manufacturing

As specified in the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO)’s Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) in India. The DCGI approves the manufacture of IPs as part of the clinical trial application review and approval process.

To obtain permission to manufacture an IP for clinical trial purposes, the 2019-CTRules explains that applicants must apply to the DCGI using the Application for Grant of Permission to Manufacture New Drug or Investigational New Drug for Clinical Trial or Bioavailability or Bioequivalence Study or for Examination, Test and Analysis (CT-10). Per Notice16Jan24, applicants may access this form via the National Single Window System (NSWS) portal (IND-3).

Per IND-73, once users have completed the NSWS portal (IND-3) registration process, they can search for their required approval applications/registrations using the NSWS Central Approvals webpage (IND-23), or by selecting the Know Your Approvals (KYA) module (IND-12) via the NSWS portal (IND-3).

See the IND-11 for guidance and additional instructions on submitting CDSCO approvals via IND-3. Per Notice1Jan24 and Notice16Jan24, the following CDSCO steps and processes may be accessed via the NSWS portal (IND-3):medical device related registration, manufacturing/import applications, and drug manufacturing/import applications.

Per the 2019-CTRules, after reviewing the CT-10 application and any supplemental information, the DCGI will either grant permission to manufacture the IP via Form CT-11 or reject the application, for reasons to be recorded in writing, within 90 working days from the date of application receipt. If applicable, the DCGI must inform the applicant of deficiencies in the application within 90 working days. If the applicant chooses to rectify the deficiencies within the specified period and provide the required information and documents, the DCGI must review the application again. Based on the review, the DCGI will either grant manufacturing permission to the applicant or reject the application within a period of 90 working days from the date the required information and documents were provided. In the case of rejection, the applicant may request the DCGI reconsider the application within a period of 60 working days from the rejection date along with payment of the specified fees in the 2019-CTRules and submission of the required information and documents. Refer to the 2019-CTRules for additional timeline information and the applicable forms. See also IND-23 for additional approval details on CT-10.

In addition, while applications may be submitted via the NSWS portal (IND-3), Notice18Feb20 amends IND-31 concerning where to mail CT-10 applications. For biological drugs, applications should be sent to CDSCO Headquarters (HQ) at FDA Bhavan, New Delhi; for drugs other than biologicals, applications should be sent to the appropriate zonal office/sub-zonal office for pure chemical testing, and the zonal office/sub-zonal office or CDSCO HQ for clinical trials or BA/BE studies. Furthermore, if the applicant obtains permission to manufacture new drugs/IPs for a clinical trial or BA/BE study, the applicant should automatically consider the approval as permission to conduct other chemical/physical testing and analysis on these new drugs/IPs. Refer to IND-58 for detailed CDSCO HQ, zonal office/sub-zonal office contact information. Notice18Feb20 also states that applicants must clearly mention the site where the product will be manufactured in their applications using the following statement: M/s. [name and address of the firm] having manufacturing premises for test and analysis at [name and address of the manufacturing site for test and analysis]. Refer to Notice18Feb20 for additional information.

Per Notice16Jan24, applicants who intend to manufacture an unapproved active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) to develop a pharmaceutical formulation for clinical trial purposes should submit the following to the DCGI via the NSWS portal (IND-3) along with any supplemental information:

If applying as a pharmaceutical formulation manufacturer, use the Application for Grant of Permission to Manufacture Formulation of Unapproved Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient for Test or Analysis or Clinical Trial or Bioavailability or Bioequivalence study (CT-12)
If applying as an API manufacturer, use the Application for Grant of Permission to Manufacture Unapproved Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient for Development of Formulation for Test or Analysis or Clinical Trial or Bioavailability or Bioequivalence Study (CT-13)
As stated in the 2019-CTRules, after reviewing the submission and conducting further inquiry, if needed, the DCGI will grant permission to the applicant to manufacture the unapproved API in Form CT-15 and permission to the manufacturer of the pharmaceutical formulation in Form CT-14 within 90 working days. If dissatisfied, the DCGI will reject the application, for reasons to be recorded in writing, within a period of 90 working days from the application submission date. Refer to the 2019-CTRules for additional timeline information and the applicable forms. See also IND-23 for additional approval details on CT-12 and CT-13. See the 2019-CTRules for additional information on CT-12 and CT-13, and see IND-73 for instructions on submitting these applications via the NSWS portal (IND-3).

Per Notice13Mar20, when the application is solely to conduct a clinical trial, the DCGI also requires the sponsor (applicant) to submit the international non-proprietary name (INN) or generic name, drug category, dosage form, and data supporting IP stability in the intended container-closure system for the duration of the clinical trial. See the 2019-CTRules (Second Schedule, Table 1) for detailed data requirements. Additionally, for Phase III clinical trial batches, process validation data requirements may not be required; however, this requirement will vary depending on the IP’s complexity (biological, high tech, etc.). If approved, the DCGI will grant permission for a period of three (3) years to both manufacturers of new drugs or investigational new drugs (INDs) and manufacturers of unapproved APIs. In exceptional circumstances, the DCGI may extend the period of permission for an additional year. See the 2019-CTRules and IND-31 for more detailed information on manufacturing application submission requirements. See Regulatory Fees section for information on manufacturing fees.

Import

As delineated in the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, the DCGI is responsible for authorizing the import of IPs in India. The DCGI approves the import of IPs as part of the clinical trial application review and approval process.

Per the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, the sponsor is required to obtain a license from the DCGI using the Application for Grant of License to Import New Drug or Investigational New Drug for Clinical Trial or Bioavailability or Bioequivalence Study or for Examination, Test and Analysis (CT-16) to import an IP (new drug or IND) for clinical trial purposes. Additionally, as explained in IND-31, the Application to Import Drugs for the Purposes of Examination, Test or Analysis (Form 12) should be used to obtain permission to import a drug that is not a new drug as required by the DCA-DCR. See also IND-23 for additional approval details on CT-16 and Form 12. See 2019-CTRules and IND-31 for additional information on CT-16 and Form 12, and see IND-73 for instructions on submitting these applications via the NSWS portal (IND-3).

Per the 2019-CTRules, the sponsor must also ensure that the imported IPs are manufactured in accordance with good manufacturing practice (GMP) as laid down in the DCA-DCR. Refer to Schedule M of the DCA-DCR to review the GMP requirements. See also the Second Schedule in the 2019-CTRules for the data requirements to be included in the DCGI’s import application.

The 2019-CTRules and IND-31 further state that the DCGI will grant an import license within 90 working days of receipt of the application. Once approved, the import license must remain valid for three (3) years from the date of issue, unless suspended or cancelled. In exceptional circumstances, the DCGI may extend the license for an additional year. (See the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for detailed clinical trial application requirements). See Regulatory Fees section for information on import fees.

As explained in IND-25, the DCGI does not require a drug import license to be obtained when an ethics committee (EC) has granted approval for the conduct of an academic clinical trial that will be using a permitted drug formulation with a new indication, a new route of administration, a new dose, or a new dosage form. A copy of the EC approval for the trial must be provided to the Port office at the time of import along with a letter of undertaking that specifies the quantity of the drug being imported and states that it will be used exclusively for the academic clinical trial.

Other Considerations

In addition, per the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, the DCGI will relax, abbreviate, omit, or defer clinical and non-clinical data requirements to import or manufacture new drugs already approved in other countries on a case-by-case basis for life threatening or serious/rare diseases and drugs intended to treat diseases of special relevance to the Indian population, unmet medical needs in India, and in disaster or special defense use (e.g., hemostatic and quick wound healing, enhancing oxygen carrying capacity, radiation safety, or drugs to combat chemical, nuclear, or biological conditions). This decision will vary depending on the specific clinical trial phase proposed and the clinical parameters related to the study drug.

Please note: India is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (IND-29), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see IND-45.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Investigator's Brochure

The 2019-CTRules requires the Investigator’s Brochure (IB) to contain the version number, release date, and the following sections:

Contents
Summary
Introduction
Physical, Chemical, and Pharmaceutical Properties and Formulation
Non-clinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects in humans (Pharmacokinetics and Product Metabolism in Humans, Safety and Efficacy, and Marketing Experience)
Summary of Data and Guidance for the Investigator
Refer to the 2019-CTRules for detailed content guidelines.

Quality Management

As noted in the 2019-CTRules the applicant is required to provide the following:

A free sale certificate from country of origin
Certificate(s) of analysis of IP shipped
Per the 2019-CTRules, the licensee is responsible for ensuring the products are manufactured in accordance with the principles of good manufacturing practice (GMP). (See the Product Management section for additional information on investigational product (IP) supply, storage, and handling requirements).

Additionally, per Notice13Mar20, when the application is solely to conduct a clinical trial, the DCGI also requires the sponsor (applicant) to submit the international non-proprietary name (INN) or generic name, drug category, dosage form and data supporting IP stability in the intended container-closure system for the duration of the clinical trial (see the Second Schedule, Table 1 in the 2019-CTRules for detailed data requirements). Additionally, for Phase III clinical trial batches, process validation data requirements may not be required; however, this requirement will vary depending on the IP’s complexity (biological, high tech, etc.).

Further, per the 2019-CTRules, the submission of requirements related to pre-clinical/toxicological animal studies may be modified or relaxed in the case of new drugs approved or marketed for several years in other countries if the DCGI determines there is adequate published evidence regarding a drug’s safety.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Per the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, the labeling of any new drug or investigational new drug product manufactured or imported for the purpose of conducting a clinical trial or for testing and analysis should include the following items:

The drug name or code number
Batch number or lot number
Manufacture date
Use before date
Storage conditions
Name of institution/organization/center where the clinical trial or testing and analysis is proposed to be conducted
Manufacturer name and address
Purpose for which the investigational product is being imported
Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

According to the 2019-CTRules and IND-31, in the event that a new drug or investigational new drug manufactured for clinical trial or testing and analysis purposes is left over, remains unused, incurs damage, has an expired shelf life date, or has been found to be of sub-standard quality, the drug must be destroyed and the action taken should be recorded.

Per the 2019-CTRules, the investigational product (IP) section of the protocol submitted as part of the clinical trial application must include the following:

IP description and packaging (i.e., IP ingredients and formulation, and placebos used, if applicable)
Dosing required during study
Packaging, labeling, and blinding method
Method of assigning treatments to participants and identification code numbering system to be used
Storage conditions
Accountability (e.g., instructions for receipt, storage, dispensation, and return of IPs)
Policy and procedure for handling unused IPs
Record Requirements

No information is currently available on IP record requirements.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
In India, per the G-XBiolMat, the G-ICMR, and the G-StemCellRes, a specimen is referred to as “human biological material,” “human biological sample,” “biological material,” or “biospecimen.” The G-XBiolMat defines a specimen as human material with the potential for use in biomedical research. According to the G-XBiolMat, the G-ICMR, and the G-StemCellRes, this material specifically includes (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Organs and parts of organs
Cells and tissue
Blood (e.g., cord blood and dried blood spots)
Gametes (e.g., sperm, ova, and oocytes)
Embryos and fetal tissue
Blastocysts
Somatic cells
The G-XBiolMat definition also includes the following:

Sub-cellular structures and cell products
Wastes (e.g., urine, feces, sweat, hair, epithelial scales, nail clippings, placenta, etc.)
Cell lines from human tissues
As per the G-XBiolMat, these biological specimens or human material samples may be obtained from the following sources:

Patients following diagnostic or therapeutic procedures (e.g., dental, labor, etc.)
Autopsy specimens
Organ or tissue donation from living or dead persons
Fetal tissue
Body waste
Abandoned tissue
Tissue banks
Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
Import/Export

As specified in the G-XBiolMat, the HumBiol-ImprtExprt, and IND-55, the applicable import/export guidelines for human biological materials/specimens in India are determined by whether the materials are to be used for biomedical research or for commercial purposes. According to IND-55, the G-XBiolMat should be followed to import/export human biological material for biomedical research purposes, and the HumBiol-ImprtExprt is to be used to import/export human biological samples for commercial purposes.

Biomedical Research

According to the G-XBiolMat, the following guidelines should be considered for requests to transfer biological material abroad for research/diagnostic purposes, and for requests to transfer biological material from abroad to Indian institutions for research purposes:

Exchange of material for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes for individual cases may be done without restriction, if this exchange is considered necessary by the doctor(s) in charge of the patient
Exchange of material from and to recognized laboratories such as the World Health Organization (WHO)’s Collaborating Centres may be allowed as part of routine activities relating to quality control, quality assurance, comparison with reference material, etc., without having to seek permission from any authority
Where exchange of material is envisioned as part of a collaborative research project, the project proposal as a whole must be routed through the appropriate authorities for evaluation and clearance (see International Research Collaboration section below for additional information)
The availability of facilities within India for carrying out certain investigations need not prevent collaboration with scientists in other countries from conducting the same investigations, including transfer of human material, if required
For the technology transfer/training of Indian scientists abroad/training of foreign scientists and students in India, and visits by foreign collaborators to their Indian partners’ laboratories to work with Indian material, there should be no restrictions on the visits of scientists to the laboratories concerned. However, any fieldwork to be undertaken in the community and other sensitive issues would have to be regulated according to the National Portal of India’s rules
International Research Collaboration

In the case of international research collaboration involving human biological material transfer, the G-XBiolMat and the G-ICMR indicate that the export of all biological materials is to be covered under existing Government of India and ethics guidelines. The G-ICMR further specifies that all biomedical and health research proposals relating to foreign assistance and/or collaboration should be submitted to the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) for a technical review. Next, the ICMR submits the project to the Health Ministry’s Screening Committee (HMSC) for review and approval through its International Health Division that serves as the HMSC’s secretariat. Refer to IND-74 for detailed information on the HMSC.

Per the G-ICMR, the ethics committee (EC) may review research proposals requiring biological material transfer on a case-by-case basis. The exchange of human biological material from and to WHO Collaborating Centres for specific purposes, as well as for individual cases of diagnosis or therapeutic purposes, may not require permission. However, Indian participating center(s) must have appropriate regulatory approval and registration to receive foreign funds for research.

See IND-1 for the application form to request a no objection certificate (NOC) to export biological samples. Refer to the G-XBiolMat, the G-ICMR, IND-74, and IND-27 for additional information.

Commercial Purposes

According to the HumBiol-ImprtExprt, per the Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) within India’s Ministry of Commerce and Industry, the import of human biological samples by Indian diagnostic laboratories/Indian clinical research centers for laboratory analysis/research and development testing, or, for exporting these materials to foreign laboratories, should be permitted by customs authorities at the port of entry/exit without prior approvals (import license/export permit) from any other government agency. In these cases, the concerned Indian company/agency should submit a statement that it is following all the applicable rules, regulations, and procedures for the safe transfer and disposal of biological samples being imported/exported. For more information, see the HumBiol-ImprtExprt.

Additionally, per Notice11Mar24, the export policy for human biological samples has been revised to permit the export of items containing human biological materials, samples, and products subject to obtaining a NOC from CDSCO. To this end, as indicated in IND-55, the ICMR has developed the Transfer of Human Biological Material (THBM) online portal (IND-67) to enable applicants to obtain the necessary NOC for the export of human biological material for commercial purposes and for contract research by Indian companies and organizations.

Material Transfer Agreement

Per the G-ICMR and IND-74, any research involving the exchange of biological materials with collaborative institutions outside India must sign a Material Transfer Agreement (MTA). The MTA must justify the purpose and quantity of the sample being collected; the type of investigation(s) to be conducted using the material; the names/addresses of institution(s)/scientist(s) to whom the material is to be sent; and address confidentiality issues, data sharing, post-analysis handling of remaining biological materials, safety norms, etc. The G-ICMR also indicates that an appropriate memoranda of understanding (MoU) should be in place to safeguard mutual country interests and ensure compliance.

Per the G-XBiolMat, the collaborating partners (India and foreign) should enter into an MoU and/or MTA for requests to transfer biological material abroad for research/diagnostic purposes, and for requests to transfer biological material from abroad to Indian institutions for research purposes.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 23, 2025
In accordance with the G-ICMR, prior to collecting, storing, or using a research participant’s human biological material, consent must be obtained from the participant or the legal representative in writing. Additionally, per the G-ICMR, it is necessary for all health research involving human participants and their biological material and data to be reviewed and approved by an appropriately constituted ethics committee (EC).

In addition to the informed consent form (ICF) required elements listed in the Informed Consent topic, the G-ICMR requires investigator(s) to communicate the following information to participants in the ICF regarding the use of their biological samples:

The participant’s right to prevent the use of their biological sample (e.g., DNA, cell-line, etc.) and related data at any time during the conduct of the research
The risk of discovery of biologically sensitive information and provisions to safeguard confidentiality
The GCLP further indicates that prior to specimen collection, appropriate counseling should be completed and written consent obtained. Attention should also be paid to the participant’s sensibilities during the entire process.

The G-ICMR also requires the following information:

The storage period of the sample/data and probability of the material being used for secondary purposes
A statement clearly indicating whether material is to be shared with others
If research on biological material and/or data leads to commercialization, a statement describing post-research plan/benefit sharing
The publication plan, if any, including photographs and pedigree charts
A provision for pre-test and post-test counseling, if there is the possibility that the research could lead to any stigmatizing condition (e.g., HIV and genetic disorders)
Pursuant to the G-LabValidTest, laboratory validation testing is used to ensure that laboratory test data and results are accurate, consistent, and precise, and may include tests that are conducted using residual, archived, unlinked, and anonymous biological samples such as blood, urine, tissue, cells, saliva, DNA, etc. At the time of biological material or biological specimen sample collection, if there is a probability of future usage of samples, appropriate informed consent must be obtained from the participants. The informed consent must clearly mention the plan for future testing purposes or storage.

The G-LabValidTest also indicates that if the biological samples are linked to different types of personal identifiers (name, address, etc.) or with health-related data (chronic illnesses, prior hospital stays), and other types of potentially sensitive data (travel history, family history) there is a risk for breach of confidentiality and such samples are not recommended for laboratory validation testing without EC approval. The investigator undertaking laboratory validation testing must also keep the EC informed regarding use of leftover, archived, or anonymous samples. The laboratories involved in the validation of tests/methods, may be exempted from ethical approval when using leftover archived and anonymized samples. See the G-LabValidTest for detailed investigator ethical and consent guidelines for conducting laboratory validation testing on various human biological samples and IND-2 for additional information related to this guidance.

Human Genetic Research Consent Requirements

As stated in the G-ICMR, investigator(s) must comply with stringent norms and exercise caution in conducting the consent process with participants for genetic research purposes. The following considerations must be taken into account during this process:

For routine genetic diagnostic testing, written consent may or may not be needed as per institutional policies; however, it is required for any research
Written informed consent is essential for procedures such as pre-symptomatic testing, next generation sequencing (NGS), prenatal testing, genomic studies, and carrier status, etc.
The investigator(s) should emphasize that consent for screening or a subsequent confirmatory test does not imply consent to any specific treatment, or termination of a pregnancy, or for research
If the research or testing involves a child, appropriate age-specific assent (verbal/oral/written) should be obtained along with parental consent
The G-ICMR further specifies that the ICF for genetic research testing should address the following additional points:

The nature and complexity of information that would be generated
The nature and consequences of returning results and the choice offered to the participant as to whether to receive that information and incidental findings, if any
Direct/indirect benefits and their implications, including if there are no direct benefits to the participants
How the data/samples will be stored, for how long, and procedures involved in anonymization, sharing, etc.
Choice to opt out of testing/withdraw from research at any time
Whether the affected individual or the participant at the starting point of the study (proband) would like to share their genetic information with family members who may benefit from it
Issues related to ownership rights, intellectual property right concerns, commercialization aspects, and benefit sharing
Per the G-ICMR, in the case of population or community-based studies, group consent must also be taken from the community head and/or the culturally appropriate authority due to the potential of the genetic research to generate information applicable to the community/populations from which the participants are drawn. However, even if group consent is taken, it will not be a replacement for individual consent.

In addition, as indicated in the G-ICMR, the transfer of human biological material to be stored at a biorepository or a biobank, or another institution, must be communicated to the participant. The participant owns their biological sample and their collected data and could therefore withdraw both the biological material donated to the biobank and the related data unless the latter is required for outcome measurement and is mentioned accordingly in the initial informed consent document. Please refer to Section 11 of the G-ICMR for detailed consent requirements associated with storing human biological materials in a biorepository or a biobank. (See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent).

For specific guidelines regarding gene therapy and stem cell therapy clinical trials, see the G-GeneThrpy and G-StemCellRes. See the G-ICMR, IND-5, and IND-27 for additional information on genetic research informed consent requirements.

Requirements
(Legislation) Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 (ITActAmend) (February 5, 2009)
Parliament of India
(Legislation) Information Technology Act, 2000 (ITAct) (Effective October 17, 2000)
Parliament of India
(Legislation) The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and The Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 (DCA-DCR) (Amended through December 31, 2016)
Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Legislation) The Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 (MHA2017) (April 7, 2017)
Parliament of India
(Regulation) Information Technology (Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or Information) Rules, 2011 (IT-SPDIRules) (April 11, 2011)
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Regulation) New Drugs and Clinical Trials (Amendment) Rules, 2024 (2024-CTRulesAmdt - Hindi and English) (Effective April 1, 2025)
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Regulation) New Drugs and Clinical Trials (Third Amendment) Rules, 2022 (2022-CTRules-3rdAmdt - Hindi and English) (Effective October 14, 2022)
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Regulation) New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 (2019-CTRules) (Last Amended January 18, 2022)
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Guidance) Ethical Guidelines for Application of Artificial Intelligence in Biomedical Research and Healthcare (G-AI-BiomedRes) (2023)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Guidance) Guidance on Ethical Requirements for Laboratory Validation Testing (G-LabValidTest) (February 2024)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Guidance) Guidelines for ICMR Network of Institutions: Joint Ethics Review of Multicentre Research (G-MultictrResRev) (March 17, 2023)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Guidance) Handbook for Applicants & Reviewers of Clinical Trials of New Drugs in India (Hdbk-ClinTrial) (January 2017)
Indian Council of Medical Research and Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Guidance) ICMR Guidelines for Good Clinical Laboratory Practices (GCLP) (2021)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Guidance) National Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical and Health Research Involving Human Participants (G-ICMR) (October 2017)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Guidance) National Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Children (G-Children) (October 2017)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Guidance) National Guidelines for Gene Therapy Product Development and Clinical Trials (G-GeneThrpy) (November 2019)
Indian Council of Medical Research, Central Drug Standards Control Organization, and Ministry of Science and Technology
(Guidance) National Guidelines for Stem Cell Research (G-StemCellRes) (2017)
Indian Council of Medical Research, Ministry of Science and Technology
(Guidance) Office Memorandum: Guidelines for Exchange of Human Biological Material for Biomedical Research Purposes (G-XBiolMat) (November 19, 1997)
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Guidance) The Subject Expert Committees Guidance Document (G-SECs) (Ver. 1.0) (2025)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Amendment in Export Policy of Human Biological Samples under Chapter-30 of ITC HS Schedule-2 of Export Policy (Notice11Mar24) (March 11, 2024)
Directorate General of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Commerce & Industry
(Notice) Import/Export Policy for Human Biological Samples for Commercial Purposes: Amendment Schedule–1 (Import Policy) and Schedule–2 (Export Policy) of ITC (HS), 2012 (HumBiol-ImprtExprt – Hindi and English) (August 4, 2016)
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
(Notice) Notice for Filing of Application for Clinical Trial, Marketing Authorization, Registration Certificate and Import License for r-DNA Derived Drugs in SUGAM Portal (Notice15Jan18) (January 15, 2018)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding CDSCO’s Clinical Research Unit (CRU) Request for Stakeholder Document Submission in Soft Copy Format (Notice12Oct23) (October 12, 2023)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding Clinical Trial Applications (Phase I, II, and IIII) for Cell and Gene Therapeutics Products through SUGAM Online Portal System (Notice9Jul25) (Effective July 10, 2025)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding Ethics Committee Registration through SUGAM Portal (Notice1Aug18) (August 1, 2018)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding List of Approved Clinical Trial Sites and Investigators (Notice2Dec19) (December 2, 2019)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding Online Submission of SAE Reports in SUGAM Portal (Notice25Feb21) (Effective March 14, 2021)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding Process Validation Report Requirement for Permission to Conduct Clinical Trials/BA-BE Studies (Notice13Mar20) (March 13, 2020)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding Registration of Ethics Committees for Biomedical and Health Research Involving Human Participants (Notice15Sept19) (Effective September 15, 2019)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding SEC Division’s Oversight of Investigational New Drugs (IND) Proposal Evaluation Meetings (Notice31Jan24) (January 31, 2024)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding Submission of Clinical Trial Site Addition and Change of Principal Investigator Applications for Clinical Trials of Biological Products (Vaccine and rDNA) (Notice24Feb25) (February 24, 2025)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding Submission of Clinical Trial Site Addition and Change of Principal Investigator Applications for Global Clinical Trials, New Drug Clinical Trials, Subsequent New Drugs, Investigational New Drugs, Fixed Dose Combinations, and Bioavailability & Bioequivalence Studies (Notice26Dec24) (December 26, 2024)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding the Launch of Additional Forms on the National Single Window System (NSWS) Portal (Notice16Jan24) (January 16, 2024)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding the Launch of Clinical Research Organisation (CRO) Registration Applications through SUGAM Portal (Notice4Mar25) (March 4, 2025)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding the Launch of the National Single Window System (NSWS) Portal (Notice1Jan24) (January 1, 2024)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Notice) Notice Regarding the New Drugs and Clinical Trial Rules 2019 FAQs (Notice18Feb20) (February 18, 2020)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Order) Order Regarding Approved Subject Expert Committees (Order13Jan20) (January 13, 2020)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Order) Order Specifying Names of Countries under Rule 101 of the New Drugs and Clinical Trial Rules, 2019 as it Relates to New Drug Approval (Order7Aug24) (August 7, 2024)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
Additional Resources
(Article) A Comparison of Regulatory Approval of Clinical Trial Protocol with Different Countries (IND-82) (August 2021)
Amaresh, K. et al; International Journal of Clinical Trials
(Article) Digital Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025 (IND-85) (Last Updated May 7, 2025)
Bhatt, Shubhankar and Jain, Sourabh; Lawrbit
(Article) Efficiency Measures Implemented for Document Submission to CDSCO (IND-7) (October 13, 2023)
Legality Simplified
(Article) Highlights of Indian Council of Medical Research National Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical and Health Research Involving Human Participants (IND-5) (May-June 2019)
Mathur, Roli et al; Indian Journal of Pharmacology
(Article) ICMR Issues Comprehensive Guidance on Ethical Requirements for Laboratory Validation Testing (IND-2) (February 9, 2024)
Nautiyal, Shardul; PharmaBiz.com
(Article) India’s DPDP Act Explained: The Latest Guide for Compliance (IND-84) (June 17, 2025)
Safna; CookieYes
(Article) Medicines Regulation: Regulatory Systems in India (IND-16) (2017)
Gupta, M. et al; WHO Drug Information
(Article) Regulation of Clinical Research Organisations (IND-83) (September 27, 2024)
Cyril Amarchand Mangaldas; Client Alert
(Document) Additional FAQ on New Drugs and Clinical Trial Rules, 2019 (IND-25) (August 23, 2019)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Document) Ethics Committee Registration Check List (IND-21) (Date Unavailable)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Document) Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on New Drugs and Clinical Trials (IND-31) (Date Unavailable)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Document) GCP Inspection Checklist (IND-34) (February 9, 2018)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Document) Global Clinical Trial (GCT) Application Checklist (IND-35) (Date Unavailable)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Document) Handbook on National Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical and Health Research Involving Human Participants (IND-27) (2018)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Document) ICMR Policy on Research Integrity and Publication Ethics (IND-28) (2019)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Document) Inspection Checklist for Ethics Committee (IND-81) (May 29, 2025)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Document) List of Approved Clinical Trial Sites & Investigators for Global Clinical Trials (IND-26) (December 2, 2019)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (IND-29) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) National Single Window System – User Guide: How to View, Identify or Apply Central Approvals (IND-73) (Last Updated November 25, 2022)
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce & Industry; Invest India, National Investment Promotion and Facilitation Agency
(Document) National Single Window System User Guide: How to Apply for CDSCO Approval (IND-11) (Last Updated March 14, 2023)
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce & Industry; Invest India, National Investment Promotion and Facilitation Agency
(Document) National Single Window System User Guide: How to Register, Sign in, Create Business Profile on NSWS (IND-61) (Last Updated January 13, 2023)
Department of Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, and Invest India
(Document) National Single Window System User Guide: How to Verify PAN using Digital Signature Certificate (DSC) on NSWS​ (For New Users)​ (IND-62) (Last Updated November 16, 2023)
Department of Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, and Invest India
(Document) National Single Window System User Guide: Add Digital Signature Certificate on NSWS (IND-64) (Last Updated November 16, 2023)
Department of Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, and Invest India
(Document) Pre-Screening Checklist for Clinical Trial and New Drugs Applications (IND-32) (March 9, 2015)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Document) Re-Registration of Ethics Committee - Checklist for Application Submissions (IND-69) (February 8, 2013)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Document) SUGAM Portal Approval Process for Global Clinical Trials (IND-22) (Date Unavailable)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Document) User Manual For e-Governance Solution for CDSCO (IND-42) (Version 1.0) (Date Unavailable)
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing and Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (IND-63) (October 19, 2013)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Good Clinical Laboratory Practice (GCLP) (IND-76) (2009)
World Health Organization
(International Guidance) ICH Guideline: The Common Technical Document for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (M4) (IND-68) (Step 5 Versions) (Modules range from 2002-2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (IND-41) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) Central Drugs Standard Control Organization - Contact Us (IND-58) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Webpage) Central Drugs Standard Control Organization - Functions (IND-79) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Webpage) Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (IND-80) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Webpage) Clinical Trials Registry - India (IND-57) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Webpage) Clinical Trials Registry - India: Important Notice for all Trial Registrants (IND-56) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Webpage) Clinical Trials Toolkit India - Routemap (IND-46) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Clinical Development Services Agency (CDSA), MRC Clinical Trials Unit, University College London, and Translational Health Science and Technology Institute (THSTI)
(Webpage) Common Forms for Ethics Committee Review (IND-52) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Webpage) Country Profile: India (IND-45) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) Ethics Committee Re-Registration Data (IND-48) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Webpage) Ethics Committee Registration Data (IND-49) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Webpage) Health Ministry Screening Committee (HMSC) Guidance (IND-74) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Webpage) NAITIK Portal (IND-54) (Current as of June 20, 2024)
National Ethics Committee Registry for Biomedical and Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Webpage) National Ethics Committee Registry for Biomedical and Health Research (NECRBHR) (IND-51) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Webpage) National Single Window System - User Guide: Document Containing Instructions to Properly Use the System (IND-4) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Department of Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, and Invest India
(Webpage) National Single Window System (NSWS) - Central Approvals (IND-23) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Department of Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, and Invest India
(Webpage) National Single Window System (NSWS) - Frequently Asked Questions (IND-24) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Department of Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, and Invest India
(Webpage) National Single Window System (NSWS) - Know Your Business Approvals (IND-12) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Department of Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, and Invest India
(Webpage) National Single Window System (NSWS) Portal (IND-3) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Department of Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, and Invest India
(Webpage) Permanent Account Number (PAN) - Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) - General (IND-33) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Tax Information Network of Income Tax Department, Ministry of Finance, Government of India
(Webpage) Registration of Ethics Committees Reviewing Biomedical and Health Research with Department of Health Research (IND-53) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Webpage) SUGAM Portal (IND-59) (Current as of June 20, 2024)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Webpage) Transfer of Human Biological Material (THBM) Portal (IND-67) (Current as of September 23, 2025)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Webpage) Transfer of Human Biological Material (IND-55) (Last Updated August 26, 2025)
Indian Council of Medical Research
Forms
(Form) Application Form for Initial Review (IND-39) (Version 1) (Date Unavailable)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Form) Application Format for the Obtaining of Export NOC of Biological Samples of Clinical Trial for Testing (Annexure) (IND-1) (July 20, 2012)
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(Form) ICMR EC Application Form for Clinical Trials (Annexure 8) (IND-36) (Version 2.0) (Date Unavailable)
Indian Council of Medical Research
(Form) ICMR EC Serious Adverse Event Reporting Format (Clinical Trials) (Annexure 9) (IND-37) (Version 2.0) (Date Unavailable)
Indian Council of Medical Research
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Kenya
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
English
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
No
Clinical trial registration required
Yes
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
No
Age of minors
Under 18
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Clinical research in Kenya is regulated and overseen by the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) and the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI).

Pharmacy and Poisons Board

As per the PPA, the CTRules, and the G-KenyaCT, Kenya’s PPB is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial approvals, oversight, and inspections. As described in KEN-21, the PPB and its Expert Committee on Clinical Trials (ECCT) evaluate all matters relating to clinical trials and grant permission for clinical trials to be conducted in Kenya. See KEN-20, KEN-21, and KEN-16 for more information about PPB.

Per the PPA and the CTRules, the PPB is authorized to undertake various mandated duties regarding regulation of medicines including (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Advise the government in all matters relating to the safety, packaging, labelling, distribution, and disposal of medicines
Ensure that all medicinal products manufactured in, imported into, or exported from the country conform to prescribed standards of quality, safety, and efficacy
Ensure that the personnel, premises, and practices employed in the manufacture, storage, marketing, distribution, and sale of medicinal substances comply with the defined codes of practice and other prescribed requirements
Grant or revoke licenses for the manufacture, importation, exportation, distribution, and sale of medicinal substances
Maintain a register of all authorized medicinal substances
Publish, at least once every three (3) months, lists of authorized or registered medicinal substances and lists of products with marketing authorizations
Regulate narcotic, psychotropic substances, and precursor chemical substances
Consider applications for approval and alterations of dossiers intended for use in marketing authorization of medical products and health technologies
Inspect and license all manufacturing premises, importing and exporting agents, wholesalers, distributors, pharmacies (including those in hospitals and clinics), and other retail outlets
Prescribe a system for sampling, analysis, and other testing procedures of finished medicinal products released into the market to ensure compliance with the labeled specifications
Conduct post-marketing surveillance of safety and quality of medical products
Monitor the market for the presence of illegal or counterfeit medicinal substances
Regulate the promotion, advertising, and marketing of medicinal substances in accordance with approved product information
Approve the use of any unregistered medicinal substance for purposes of clinical trials, compassionate use, and emergency use authorization during public health emergencies
Approve and regulate clinical trials on health products
Disseminate information on medical products to health professionals and to the public to promote their rational use
Collaborate with other national, regional, and international institutions on medicinal substances regulation
Advise the Cabinet Secretary on matters relating to control, authorization, and registration of medicinal substances
Implement any other function relating to the regulation of medicinal substances
Please note: Kenya is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (KEN-3), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see KEN-15.

National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation

As delineated in the STI-Act and G-ECBiomedRes, in addition to obtaining the PPB’s permission to conduct research in Kenya, the principal investigator or the head of a research institution must obtain a favorable opinion from an ethics committee accredited by NACOSTI and a NACOSTI research license prior to initiating a study. NACOSTI’s role is to regulate and ensure quality in the science, technology, and innovation sector, and to advise the Kenyan government on related matters. According to Part II of the STI-Act, NACOSTI has specific research coordination and oversight functions, and it liaises with the Kenya National Innovation Agency (KeNIA) and the National Research Fund to ensure funding and implementation of prioritized research programs. In addition per the STI-Act and KEN-39, NACOSTI is mandated to register and accredit research institutions in Kenya. The objective of registration and accreditation is to uphold the standard of research in the country and secure public confidence in the national research system. See KEN-32 for more information about NACOSTI’s mandate and functions.

Contact Information

Pharmacy and Poisons Board

According to the G-KenyaCT and KEN-22, the PPB contact information is as follows (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Pharmacy and Poisons Board
P.O. Box 27663 - 00506
Lenana Road Opp. DOD
Nairobi, Kenya

Telephone: (+254) 709 770 100 or (+254) 709 770 xxx (where xxx represents the extension of the officer or office)
Email: info@ppb.go.ke or info@pharmacyboardkenya.org
For Clinical Trials Inquiries: cta@pharmacyboardkenya.org

National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation

According to KEN-29, the NACOSTI contact information is as follows:

National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation
off Waiyaki, Upper Kabete
P. O. Box 30623
00100 Nairobi, Kenya

Phone (mobile): 0713 788 787 / 0735 404 245 / 020 8001077
Email: customercare@nacosti.go.ke or info@nacosti.go.ke

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the PPA, the CTRules, the G-KenyaCT, and KEN-21, Kenya’s Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB), together with its Expert Committee on Clinical Trials (ECCT), is responsible for reviewing, evaluating, and approving applications for clinical trials using registered or unregistered investigational products (IPs). The G-KenyaCT specifies that the scope of the PPB’s assessment includes all clinical trials (Phases I-IV). As delineated in the CTRules, the G-KenyaCT, and KEN-21, the PPB review and approval process may not be conducted in parallel with the ethics committee (EC) review. Rather, EC approval must be obtained prior to applying for PPB approval. As delineated in the STI-Act and G-ECBiomedRes, the principal investigator or the head of a research institution must obtain a favorable opinion from an EC accredited by the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI) and a NACOSTI research license prior to initiating a study.

Clinical Trial Review Process

Pharmacy and Poisons Board

Per the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, the PPB, through the ECCT, communicates the decision to approve, request additional information, or reject the application to the sponsor or the representative in writing within 30 working days of receiving a valid application. The G-KenyaCT indicates that in the case of rejection, the applicant may appeal and provide additional information to satisfy PPB requirements. In specific cases, the PPB may decide to refer the matter to external experts for recommendation.

As specified in the G-KenyaCT, each ECCT member, prior to reviewing the application, will declare any conflict of interest in the study and should have no financial or personal interests, which could affect their impartiality. During the protocol review, the reviewers must use the standard criteria (including available clinical and non-clinical data etc.) defined by the PPB. Confidentiality must be maintained during the review. Per the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, the PPB/ECCT’s review must consider:

The reliability and robustness of the data generated in the clinical trial, taking into account statistical approaches, design of the clinical trial, and methodology, including sample size and randomization, comparator, and endpoints
Compliance with the requirements concerning the manufacturing and import of IPs and auxiliary medicinal products
Compliance with the labelling requirements
The completeness and adequateness of the investigator's brochure
Regarding protocol amendments, the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT stipulate that any new information affecting the conduct/management of the trial, safety of the participants, and manufacture of the IP necessitating changes to the protocol, consent form, and trial sites require immediate submission of the amended documents to PPB for review and approval. Arrangements must be in place to take appropriate urgent safety measures to protect participants against any immediate hazard where new events relating to the conduct of the trial, or the development of the IP are likely to affect the safety of the participants. A copy of a favorable opinion letter from the EC on record must be submitted with the request for approval of a proposed amendment to the PPB. PPB approval must be obtained for all substantial amendments. Minor amendments or administrative changes may be implemented after getting the EC’s approval, but a record of these amendments must be kept for possible inspection by the PPB. See Submission Process and Submission Content sections for additional details on amendment submissions. Also, see the G-KenyaCT for examples of substantial amendments.

In addition, per the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor or the representative is required to request approval annually from the PPB at least six (6) weeks prior to the expiration of the previous approval.

Per the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, the PPB may withdraw the authorization to conduct a clinical trial if it finds that the safety of the participants in the trial is compromised or that the scientific reasons for conducting the trial have changed. Additionally, per the CTRules, the PPB may revoke the approval if it determines that the IP has expired or is not usable.

As delineated in the G-KenyaCT, the PPB may inspect clinical trial sites to ensure that the generally accepted principles of good clinical practice (GCP) are met. The objectives of the inspection are to:

Ensure that participants are not subjected to undue risks and that their rights, safety, and wellbeing are protected
Validate the quality of the data generated
Investigate complaints
Verify the accuracy and reliability of clinical trial data submitted to the PPB in support of research or marketing applications
Assess compliance with PPB guidelines and regulations governing the conduct of clinical trials
Provide real-time assessment of ongoing trials
Per CRO-Inspect, the PPB is responsible for inspecting clinical trial and bioequivalence study sites that generate data for registration of medicines. The PPB requires that these sponsor and contract research organization sites comply with applicable good practices, including GCP, good laboratory practice (GLP), and good documentation practices. Based on risk assessments, the PPB will determine compliance with generally accepted good practice through inspections and, where appropriate, document reviews. In addition, see Cert-Emrgcy for information about GCP and good manufacturing practice certifications during emergencies.

Special Circumstances and Public Health Emergencies

The CTRules delineates that the PPB may, in special circumstances, authorize the conduct of a clinical trial under fast-track procedures or non-routine procedures. PPB may recognize and use clinical trial decisions, reports, or information from other competent authorities authorizing fast-track clinical trials. The special circumstances may include:

A public health emergency
The rapid spread of an epidemic disease
Any other circumstance as may be determined by the PPB
The G-KenyaCT outlines PPB’s scope of assessment of a clinical trial application during a public health emergency. The PPB will conduct an expedited review and liaise with relevant stakeholders (including relevant ECs and other oversight bodies) to facilitate a holistic review of an application in a fast-track manner. The following prioritization criteria must be applied in the selection of applications for expedited review:

Epidemiology of the emergency
Morbidity and mortality associated with the emergency and/or condition under study
Supporting scientific data/information available for the IP at the time of submission
Feasibility of the implementation of the trial design within the context of the emergency
Benefit impact of the intervention and/or trial design
In addition, PPB’s assessment will consider the following:

The research does not compromise the response to an outbreak or appropriate care
Studies are designed to yield scientifically valid results under the challenging and often rapidly evolving conditions of disasters and disease outbreak
The research is responsive to the health needs or priorities of the disaster victims and affected communities and cannot be conducted outside a disaster situation
The participants are selected fairly and adequate justification is given when particular populations are targeted or excluded, for example, health workers
The potential burdens and benefits of research participation and the possible benefits of the research are equitably distributed
The risks and potential individual benefits of experimental interventions are assessed realistically, especially when they are in the early phases of development
Communities are actively engaged in study planning to ensure cultural sensitivity, while recognizing and addressing the associated practical challenges
The individual informed consent of participants is obtained from individuals capable of giving informed consent
Research results are disseminated, data are shared, and any effective interventions developed or knowledge generated are made available to the affected communities
National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation

STI-Act stipulates that NACOSTI issues research licenses if it finds that the conduct of the research is beneficial to the country and will not adversely affect any aspect of the nature, environment, or security of the country. The license issued will have NACOSTI’s seal and will indicate the commencement and expiration of the research. In addition, NACOSTI maintains a register of all persons granted a license, which is available for public inspection during normal working hours free of charge.

KEN-31 states that if a research license application does not meet the conditions required under the STI-Act, NACOSTI must reject the application and communicate the reasons to the applicant. Any person may appeal NACOSTI’s decision to the Cabinet Secretary within 30 days of being notified of the decision. For approved research, NACOSTI may conduct an evaluation to assess compliance with the conditions of the license. If the research project has not been completed within the stipulated period, the researcher may apply for renewal of the license and pay the requisite fee. The researcher is expected to apply for renewal by attaching a progress report instead of a proposal. KEN-31 indicates that the duration of the research license is one (1) year.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Pharmacy and Poisons Board

Per the PPA and the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor or the representative is responsible for paying a fee to the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) to submit a clinical trial application for authorization. The PPB currently requires a non-refundable application fee of $1,000 USD, or the equivalent in Kenya Shillings at the prevailing bank rates.

Payment Instructions

As stated in Annex 2 of the G-KenyaCT, payment is to be made by a bank check payable to the “Pharmacy and Poisons Board” and presented to the PPB’s accounts office upon submitting the application.

Payment can also be made by electronic fund transfer (EFT) to the PPB Bank account, if required. The sponsor or the representative is responsible for all bank charges associated with the EFT. Details of the EFT payment should be obtained from the PPB prior to initiating such a transaction.

National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation

As delineated in KEN-31, the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI) charges a fee that varies depending on the applicant’s status as Kenyan or non-Kenyan, and standing as a researcher (i.e., student, public/private institution, private company). The fees are non-refundable and also apply to research license renewals. Details on additional requirements are provided in the Submission Content section.

Student, Undergraduate/Diploma: East African Community (EAC) Countries – 100 Kenya Shillings; Kenyan Citizens – 100 Kenya Shillings; Rest of Africa – 200 Kenya Shillings; Non-Africans - $150 USD
Research (Masters): EAC Countries – 1,000 Kenya Shillings; Kenyan Citizens – 1,000 Kenya Shillings; Rest of Africa – 2,000 Kenya Shillings; Non-Africans - $350 USD
Research (PhD): EAC Countries – 2,000 Kenya Shillings; Kenyan Citizens – 2,000 Kenya Shillings; Rest of Africa – 4,000 Kenya Shillings; Non-Africans - $400 USD
Post-Doctoral: EAC Countries – 5,000 Kenya Shillings; Kenyan Citizens – 5,000 Kenya Shillings; Rest of Africa – 10,000 Kenya Shillings; Non-Africans - $500 USD
Public Institutions: Kenyan Citizens – 10,000 Kenya Shillings
Private Institutions, Commercial/Market Research, Companies: Kenyan Citizens – 20,000 Kenya Shillings
See KEN-31 for information on service charges.

Payment Instructions

Per KEN-31, NACOSTI has migrated payment services for research licensing to the eCitizen platform (KEN-12). East African citizens have the following payment options on KEN-12 with a Kenya Shillings account: mobile money via Mpesa Express or Paybill Number 222222; or these other available payments via KEN-12:

Airtel Money
Kenya Commercial Bank
Co-operative Bank
Pesaflow Direct
National Bank
RTGS
KEN-31 indicates that non-Kenyans should use the US Dollar account on KEN-12 with these payment options:

Kenya Commercial Bank (USD)
Co-operative Bank (USD)
NBK (USD)
Equity Cash
Debit/credit/prepaid card
Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Overview

As per the G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, and KEN-30, Kenya requires an independent review of research through a National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI)-accredited ethics committee (EC) in one (1) of the local institutions charged with the responsibility of conducting research in human participants. KEN-25 provides a list of the accredited institutional ECs.

Ethics Committee Composition

As delineated in the G-ECAccred, institutional ECs should consist of at least seven (7) members, or an odd number above seven (7). The G-ECBiomedRes states that these members should be multidisciplinary and multisectoral in composition, collectively encompass relevant scientific expertise, balanced age and gender distribution, and include laypersons representing community interests and concerns. Per the G-ECAccred, the composition should meet the following requirements:

At least one (1) member with knowledge and understanding of Kenyan law
At least one-third of the members must be female, and one-third must be male
At least one (1) member who is unaffiliated with the institution
At least two (2) members must have research expertise and experience, one (1) of whom must be in the health field
At least one (1) member must be a lay member
For ECs reviewing clinical research, at least two (2) members must be clinicians, one (1) of whom is currently in active practice or clinical research
Reflect the regional and ethnic diversity of the people of Kenya
The chairperson must also have some basic training and/or experience in bioethics and leadership. All EC appointments are the responsibility of the institution’s administrative head. See the G-ECAccred and the G-ECBiomedRes for detailed institutional EC requirements.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

Per G-ECBiomedRes, ECs need to have independence from political, institutional, professional, and market influences. As delineated in the G-ECAccred, the G-ECBiomedRes, and the STI-Regs, institutional ECs must operate within written standard operating procedures (SOPs) which delineate the EC’s process for conducting reviews. Per the G-ECAccred, SOPs should include but are not limited to information on EC scope, responsibility, and objectives, institutions served, committee functions, terms and conditions of member appointment, business procedures including meeting schedules and types of reviews, documentation, recordkeeping, and archiving procedures, quorum requirements, communication procedures, and complaint process and dispute resolution procedures. Per the G-ECAccred and the STI-Regs, these documents must be provided to NACOSTI.

Per the G-ECAccred, the quorum for NACOSTI-accredited EC meetings must include:

At least 50 percent of the membership to form the quorum
A lay person present in all meetings
For ECs reviewing clinical research, at least two (2) clinician members, one (1) of whom is currently in active practice or clinical research.
The G-ECBiomedRes also indicates that ECs should establish the specific quorum requirements for reviewing and deciding on applications including:

The minimum number of members required to compose a quorum (e.g., more than half the members)
The professional qualifications requirements (e.g., physician, lawyer, statistician, paramedical, or layperson) and the distribution of those requirements over the quorum; no quorum should consist entirely of members of one (1) profession or one (1) gender; a quorum should include at least one (1) member whose primary area of expertise is in a non-scientific area, and at least one (1) member who is independent of the institution/research site
Per G-ECBiomedRes, EC member terms of appointment should be established that include the duration of an appointment, the policy for the renewal of an appointment, the disqualification procedure, the resignation procedure, and the replacement procedure. A statement of the conditions of appointment should be drawn up that includes the following:

A member should be willing to publicize their full name, profession, and affiliation
All reimbursement for work and expenses, if any, within or related to an EC should be recorded and made available to the public upon request
A member should sign a confidentiality agreement regarding meeting deliberations, applications, information on research participants, and related matters
Regarding training, EC members should have initial and continued education regarding the ethics and science of biomedical research. The conditions of appointment should indicate the availability and requirements of introductory training, as well as on-going continuing education. This education may be linked to cooperative arrangements with other ECs in the area, country, and region.

For detailed institutional EC requirements and information on other administrative processes, see the G-ECAccred and the G-ECBiomedRes. See KEN-17 and KEN-26 for examples of accredited EC submission and review guidelines.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Overview

According to G-ECBiomedRes, the primary scope of information assessed by the institutional ethics committees (ECs) relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial. The G-ECAccred further states that the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI) accredits ECs in order to uphold the standard of ethics review in the country; develop public confidence and trust in the national research system; facilitate equitable access to research and human health records in health facilities; and facilitate coordination and collaboration among ECs. See the G-ECAccred and the G-ECBiomedRes for detailed ethical review guidelines.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

As per the G-KenyaCT and KEN-21, the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB)’s review and approval of a clinical trial application is dependent upon obtaining approval by an accredited institutional EC. Consequently, the PPB and EC reviews may not be conducted in parallel.

As set forth in the G-ECBiomedRes, ECs must be constituted to ensure an independent and competent review and evaluation of all ethical aspects of clinical trials. ECs must review research involving human participants to ensure they meet the following ethical principles:

Respect for persons, including respect of autonomy, protection of vulnerable groups, and protection of privacy and confidentiality
Beneficence
Justice, which in research means equitable distribution of the benefits and the burdens
For additional details on the principles and benchmarks for ethical review, see G-ECBiomedRes.

Per the G-ECBiomedRes, expedited review may be permitted for protocols involving no more than minimal risk to research participants.

The G-ECBiomedRes indicates that all ECs should carry out regular monitoring of approved protocols involving human participants. In case of any adverse events, the EC should report this immediately to Kenya’s National Bioethics Committee (NBC).

Per the G-ECBiomedRes, with collaborative research projects, the collaborating investigators, institutions, and countries must function as equal partners with safeguards to avoid exploitation of local researchers and participants. An external sponsoring agency should submit the research protocol to their country’s EC, as well as the Kenyan EC where the research is to be conducted. Further, this research must be responsive to the health needs of Kenya and reasonably accessible to the community in which the research was conducted. Consideration should be given to the sponsoring agency agreeing to maintain health services and faculties established for the purposes of the study in Kenya after the research has been completed. Such collaborative research must have a local/Kenyan co-principal investigator.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
As per the G-KenyaCT, G-ECBiomedRes, and KEN-30, Kenya requires an independent review of research through a National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI)-accredited ethics committee (EC) in one (1) of the local institutions charged with the responsibility of conducting research in human participants. The EC fee to review a clinical trial application will vary depending on the institution. See KEN-25 and KEN-38 for lists of NACOSTI-accredited institutional ECs. For an example of institutional fee requirements charged by the Scientific and Ethics Review Unit (SERU) at the Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI), see KEN-27.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Overview

As set forth in the STI-Act and KEN-32, the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI) is the central body responsible for the oversight, promotion, and coordination of research. NACOSTI’s role is to regulate and ensure quality in the science, technology, and innovation sector, and to advise the Kenyan government on related matters. As per the G-ECAccred, NACOSTI has delegated the task of reviewing research proposals for ethical clearance to accredited institutional ethics committees (ECs) to ensure that research conducted in the country observes high research ethics standards.

Per the G-ECBiomedRes, Kenya's National Bioethics Committee (NBC) advises NACOSTI on research ethics. In addition, NBC offers dispute resolution if an applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of an EC. Finally, the NBC must terminate research at any stage if it is found to be harmful to the participants.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

As per the STI-Regs and the G-ECAccred, NACOSTI is responsible for accrediting institutional ECs. Per the G-ECAccred, the application requirements for accreditation are:

A completed application form (KEN-10 or Annex III of the G-ECAccred)
Copy of the standard operating procedures (SOPs)
Copies of abridged curriculum vitaes (CVs) (no more than four (4) pages) for each member of the proposed EC (including the training attended)
Profile of the organization/institution detailing the areas of competence (no more than four (4) pages)
As indicated in KEN-40, institutions can apply for a license to establish a research institution on the NACOSTI eCitizen platform (KEN-12).

Per the G-ECAccred, NACOSTI issues a certificate of accreditation to accredited institutional ECs, which is valid for three (3) years from the date of NACOSTI’s notification. All accredited ECs must submit annual reports to NACOSTI by July 31st for review and monitoring. Applications for renewal of accreditation should be made six (6) months before expiry of the accreditation period. Failure to renew accreditation or failure to maintain the appropriate standards for continuity of accreditation will mean that the accredited status of the EC will lapse at the end of the current accreditation period. Accreditation must be terminated if the accredited committee fails to maintain the required standards. For re-accreditation review purposes, ECs must provide the SOPs under which they will operate. The SOPs are not required as part of the annual reporting process, unless they have been amended, but are required to be stated/included for the re-accreditation review process (every three (3) years). See the G-ECAccred for additional details on the accreditation process.

See the Site/Investigator Selection section for more information on the sponsor and site’s registration and application requirements.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the PPA, the STI-Act, the CTRules, the G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, KEN-21, and KEN-16, Kenya requires the sponsor or the representative to obtain clinical trial authorization from the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB)’s Expert Committee on Clinical Trials (ECCT) and an independent ethics review through a National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI)-accredited ethics committee (EC) in a local institution. In addition, the STI-Act and KEN-31 specify that applicants must obtain a research license from NACOSTI prior to initiating a study. The G-KenyaCT also states that the PPB review and approval process may not be conducted in parallel with the EC review. EC approval must be obtained prior to applying for PPB approval.

Regulatory Submission

Pharmacy and Poisons Board

As described in the G-KenyaCT and KEN-16, the sponsor or the representative is expected to submit the clinical trial application electronically via the PPB online system (KEN-16). The clinical trial application form is available in KEN-16. Per the G-KenyaCT, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor should only file one (1) application to the PPB. According to KEN-34, all application documents should be signed, dated, and version referenced, if applicable, and should be in English. See Annex 7 of the G-KenyaCT to view a flowchart of the submission and approval process.

Per the G-KenyaCT, upon receipt of a clinical trial application, the PPB’s Clinical Trial Division of the Product Safety Department screens the application package for completeness. When an application for a clinical trial is accepted, an acknowledgement of receipt will be issued with a reference number for each application. This PPB/ECCT reference number must be quoted in all correspondence concerning the application in the future. This will be communicated through email to the applicant or through KEN-16.

Per the G-KenyaCT, sponsors (applicants) can request pre-submission meetings with the PPB to discuss pertinent issues prior to making a formal submission. The request must be made via KEN-16 or in an official letter and include the following information:

Background information on the disease to be treated
Background information on the product
Quality development
Non-clinical development
Clinical development
Regulatory status
Rationale for seeking advice
Proposed questions and applicant’s positions
In addition, per the G-KenyaCT, the letter must be addressed to the Chief Executive Officer of the PPB and sent to admin@pharmacyboardkenya.org and copied to cta@pharmacyboardkenya.org. The request for a meeting should propose two (2) different dates for the meeting at least three (3) weeks away.

Per G-KenyaCT, any new information that affects the conduct/management of the trial; safety of the participants; and manufacture of the product necessitating changes to the protocol, consent form, and trial sites, etc. will require immediate submission of the amended documents to the PPB for review and approval. Minor amendments or administrative changes may be implemented after getting the EC’s approval, but a record of these amendments must be kept for possible inspection by the PPB.

National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation

Per KEN-31, an application for a NACOSTI research license should be submitted online via the Research Information Management System (RIMS) (KEN-24).

Ethics Review Submission

Each institutional EC has its own required submission procedures, which can differ significantly regarding the application format and number of copies. See KEN-17 for an example of a NACOSTI-accredited EC’s guidelines.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

Pharmacy and Poisons Board

As per the CTRules, the G-KenyaCT, and KEN-34, the following documentation must be submitted (signed, dated, and version referenced) to the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Cover letter
Study protocol
Proof of study registration in the Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (KEN-19)
Patient information leaflet and informed consent form (ICF)
Investigator’s Brochure (IB) and package inserts
Investigational Medicinal Product Dossier (IMPD), including stability data for the investigational product (IP)
Adequate data and information on previous studies and phases to support the current study
Good manufacturing practice (GMP) certificate of the IP from the site of manufacture issued by a competent health authority in the manufacturer’s jurisdiction of origin
Certificate of analysis of the IP
Pictorial sample of the IPs, including the labeling text
Signed investigator(s) curriculum vitae(s) (CV(s)), including that of the study pharmacist (the CV should include the current workload of the principal investigator (PI))
Evidence of contractual agreement between the relevant parties
Evidence of recent good clinical practice (GCP) training of the core study staff
Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) information, including the charter, composition, and meeting schedule
Detailed study budget
Financial declaration by the sponsor and PI (KEN-2 and Annex 5 of the G-KenyaCT)
No conflict of interest declaration by the sponsor and PI
Signed declarations by the sponsor, PI, and the monitor that the study will be carried out according to the protocol and applicable laws, regulations, and GCP requirements (KEN-1 and Annex 4 of the G-KenyaCT)
Indemnity cover for PI, investigators, and study pharmacist
Clinical trials insurance cover for the study participants
Copy of favorable opinion letter from local ethics committee (EC)
Copy of current practice licenses for the investigators and study pharmacist
Copy of approval letter(s) from collaborating institutions or other regulatory authorities, if applicable
For multicenter/multi-site studies, an addendum for each of the proposed sites including, among other things, the sites’ capacity to carry out the study (e.g., personnel, equipment, laboratory)
A signed statement by the applicant indicating that all information contained in, or referenced by, the application is complete and accurate, and is not false or misleading (Annex 4 of the G-KenyaCT)
Payment of fees
Statistical analysis plan
A signed checklist (KEN-34 and Annex 2 of the G-KenyaCT)
Per the G-KenyaCT, a request for approval of an amendment must include a summary of the proposed amendments; the reason for the amendment; the impact of the amendment on the original study objectives; the impact of the amendments on the study endpoints and data generated; and the impact of the proposed amendments on the safety and wellbeing of study participants.

KEN-35 describes the submission content for requesting annual approval from the PPB.

National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation

Per the STI-Regs and KEN-31, non-Kenyan applicants must be affiliated with a Kenyan institution. Per KEN-31, applicants must apply online through National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI)’s Research Information Management System (RIMS) website (KEN-24) and upload the following:

Passport size color photo in JPG or PNG format
Scanned ID/passport in PDF format
Introductory letter from relevant institution signed by an authorized officer
Affiliation letter from relevant local institution for foreigners signed by an authorized officer and valid for one (1) year
Grant letter from the funding agency to support the amount indicated to fund the research
PPB clinical trial approval
Prior Informed Consent (PIC), Mutually Agreed Terms (MAT), or Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) where applicable, for applications to conduct research on genetic resources and derivatives
Approved research proposal in PDF format
Certificate of ethical clearance of the research (see list of accredited ECs in KEN-25)
Evidence of payment as the last page of the uploaded proposal
Per KEN-31, the following conditions apply to the research license:

The research license is valid for the proposed research, site, and specified period
Both the research license and any rights thereunder are non-transferable
NACOSTI may monitor and evaluate the research
The licensee must inform the relevant County Director of Education, County Commissioner, and County Governor before research commencement
Excavation, filming, and collection of specimens are subject to further permissions from relevant government agencies
The research license does not give authority to transfer research materials
The licensee shall submit one (1) hard copy and upload a soft copy of their final report within one (1) year of completion of the research
NACOSTI reserves the right to modify the conditions of the research license including its cancellation without prior notice
KEN-31 states that if the research is not completed within the stipulated period, the applicant may apply for renewal of the research license and pay the requisite fee. A progress report should be submitted with the request for renewal instead of a proposal. The progress report must indicate the objectives and activities that have been accomplished, as well as the research work that has yet to be undertaken. KEN-31 further indicates that submissions requesting renewal should be made at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the approval period.

Ethics Committee Requirements

EC requirements vary depending on the specific EC. See KEN-17 and KEN-26 for examples of accredited EC submission and review guidelines.

As set forth in the G-ECBiomedRes, a foreign sponsoring agency must also submit its research protocol for ethics review according to its own country’s standards. This research must be responsive to the health needs of Kenya and reasonably accessible to the community in which the research was conducted.

Clinical Protocol

Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with requirements set forth in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14). The CTRules the G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, and KEN-14 outline the key elements of a research protocol in Kenya (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

A project title that adequately captures the essence of the study
The names, addresses, signatures, and updated abridged curriculum vitae of the investigators
Evidence that the PI has prior training in GCP
Contact information for the EC and collaborating institutions
A summary of the project
Introduction, background, and literature review, including nonclinical data
Study objectives, rationale, questions, and hypothesis/es
Study site, design, and methodology
Ethical considerations
Role of investigators
Schedule
References
Budget
Publication policy
Consent explanation - elements of consent explanations
ICF with signature provisions for participants and the PIs
Risks and benefits
Mode of assessment of the safety and efficacy of the IP
Mode of collecting, analyzing, and reporting the statistics of the clinical trial
Source data documents of the clinical trial
Quality control and quality assurance
Confidentiality
Recruitment, selection, treatment, and withdrawal of participants
Compensation and post-trial access program
Undue inducement and coercion
Voluntariness
Alternative treatment(s) if available
Storage of specimens
MTA, where applicable
Data management and statistical analysis
In addition, per the G-KenyaCT, the protocol should have a clear description of study stoppage rules indicating reasons, who makes the decision, and how the decision will be communicated to the PPB and the EC.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Overview

Based on the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB)'s review and approval of an application to conduct a clinical trial is dependent upon obtaining ethics approval from a National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI)-accredited ethics committee (EC). Therefore, the PPB and EC reviews may not be conducted in parallel. In addition, the STI-Act and KEN-31 specify that all applicants must obtain a research license from NACOSTI prior to initiating a study.

Regulatory Authority Approval

Pharmacy and Poisons Board

Per the G-KenyaCT, sponsors (or applicants) can request pre-submission meetings to discuss pertinent issues prior to making a formal submission. The request must be made via the PPB online system (KEN-16) or in an official letter addressed to the Chief Executive Officer of the PPB and sent to admin@pharmacyboardkenya.org and copied to cta@pharmacyboardkenya.org. The request for a meeting should propose two (2) different dates for the meeting with the proposed dates being at least three (3) weeks away. (See Submission Process section for details on the content of the request.)

Per the G-KenyaCT, upon receipt of a clinical trial application, the PPB’s Clinical Trial Division of the Product Safety Department screens the application package for completeness, which takes five (5) days. If accepted, an automatic system-generated reference number will be issued for each application. If additional information is needed, the sponsor will have 10 days to respond. The PPB aims to respond to applications within 30 working days. The sponsor or the representative must reference the PPB/Expert Committee on Clinical Trials (ECCT) number in all future application-related correspondence. The application is then evaluated by the ECCT and PPB staff according to their respective standard operating procedures. The PPB/ECCT’s decision to approve, request additional information, or reject the application is communicated to the sponsor or the representative in writing within 30 days of receiving a valid application. If additional information is requested, the sponsor has 90 days to respond after which the PPB has 15 days to issue a final decision. In certain cases, the PPB may refer the application to external experts for their recommendation.

Per the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor or the representative is also required to request approval annually from the PPB at least six (6) weeks prior to the expiration of the previous approval. Refer to the Checklist for Submitting a Request for Annual Approval (KEN-35) for relevant documentation requirements.

National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation

Per KEN-5 and KEN-31, the timeline for NACOSTI’s license application process is 30 days.

KEN-31 states that if a research license application does not meet the conditions required under the STI-Act, NACOSTI must reject the application and communicate the reasons to the applicant. Any person may appeal NACOSTI’s decision to the Cabinet Secretary within 30 days of being notified of the decision.

Ethics Committee Approval

The EC review and approval process timeline will vary by institution.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the PPA, the STI-Act, the G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, KEN-21, and KEN-16, a clinical trial can only commence after the sponsor or the representative receives authorization from Kenya’s Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB), and ethics committee (EC) approval from an institutional EC that has been accredited by the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI) prior to initiating a study. ECs are accredited pursuant to the requirements delineated in the G-ECAccred. The G-KenyaCT specifies that the PPB review and approval process may not be conducted in parallel with the EC review. In addition, the STI-Act and KEN-31 state that all applicants must obtain a research license from NACOSTI prior to initiating a study. No waiting period is required following the applicant’s receipt of these approvals. Regarding notifications, KEN-31 requires the licensee to inform the relevant County Director of Education, County Commissioner, and County Governor before commencement of the research. Further, the licensee must disclose to NACOSTI, the institutional ECs, and the relevant national agencies any findings that are of national strategic importance.

As per the PPA and the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor or the representative is required to obtain an import license for the shipment of an investigational product to be used in the trial. (See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information).

As stated in the G-KenyaCT, Kenyan clinical trials should be conducted in compliance with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14).

Clinical Trial Agreement

Prior to initiating the trial, the G-KenyaCT requires that the sponsor agree with investigator(s) on the definition, establishment, and assignment of responsibilities specified in the protocol. These responsibilities include conduct of the trial in compliance with KEN-14 and the approved protocol; data management; unblinding of treatment codes; statistical considerations; and preparation of the final clinical report. The sponsor, in a written document, may agree to transfer all related activities of the clinical trial to designated research institutions. However, all responsibility for the trial lies with the sponsor. Prior to the initiation of the clinical trial, the agreement between the sponsor and investigators should be in writing as part of the protocol submitted for PPB approval or in a separate agreement. The sponsor and investigators must sign and date the protocol of the trial to confirm the agreement.

Clinical Trial Registration

As per the G-KenyaCT, all clinical trials taking place in Kenya must be registered in the PPB’s Online Clinical Trials Registry System (KEN-16). The principal investigator is required to log in and set up an account to register a study.

In addition, as required by KEN-34, all clinical trials taking place in Kenya must be registered in the Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (KEN-19).

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

According to the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Kenya’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (or Adverse Experience) (AE) – Any untoward medical occurrence in a participant in a clinical investigation study or intervention product, and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the treatment
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – All noxious and unintended responses to a clinical trial study or interventional product related to any dose or all unintended noxious responses to a registered medicinal product which occurs at doses normally used in humans for prophylaxis, diagnosis, or therapy of diseases or for modification of physiological function
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or is a congenital anomaly/birth defect
Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR) – A serious adverse reaction that is not identified in practice, severity, or frequency by the referenced safety information
Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

Per G-KenyaCT, the investigator must ensure that all SAEs are reported promptly to Kenya’s Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) within the mandated timelines, as described below. Proper protection procedures or treatments should be administered to trial participants with SAEs.

Sponsor Responsibilities

As indicated in the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor should report to the PPB and all relevant institutions, all SAEs and SUSARs occurring during the course of the trial. The G-KenyaCT specifies that the sponsor should expedite reporting all SAEs to the PPB and the ethics committee (EC), and the sponsor and investigators should immediately undertake appropriate and necessary measures and treatment to protect the trial participants. The CTRules delineates that where a sponsor conducts a clinical trial on the same health product or active pharmaceutical substance in another country, the sponsor must submit a report of any SUSAR or SAE that occurs in the other clinical trial to the PPB. Per the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, a sponsor must submit an initial report of a fatal or life-threatening SUSAR or SAE as soon as it occurs but, in any case, no later than seven (7) days after the occurrence of the event. The G-KenyaCT indicates that if the initial report is incomplete, the sponsor must submit a completed report based on the initial information within an additional eight (8) days. As required in the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, a report of the occurrence of a SUSAR or SAE must specify whether the SUSAR or SAE is related to the clinical trial.

As indicated in the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, other important considerations and timelines include the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The sponsor must notify all the investigators involved in ongoing clinical trials of the investigational product (IP) of all SAEs and SUSARs within 15 calendar days
Any IP-related SAE must receive immediate medical attention and be reported to the PPB
The SAE report form must be completed (including lab results) and submitted to enable causality assessment
All fatal cases must be accompanied by a formal autopsy report, and a verbal autopsy report should be submitted in those exceptional cases where a formal autopsy is not possible
Any frequent IP related AE/ADR must receive immediate medical attention and be reported to the PPB within seven (7) days
The sponsor must submit a report on a SUSAR that is not fatal or life-threatening within 15 days after the occurrence of the event
The principal investigator (PI) is required to submit follow-up information as soon as it becomes available
All additional information should be clearly marked as updated and must include the Protocol Number and Participant Number
Foreign regulatory decisions that affect the safety or use of the product under study must be reported to the PPB within seven (7) days through a detailed report
Literature reports that have implications for the safety of the IP must be submitted within 15 days with a detailed report and a copy of the publication
New information or notification of change in nature, severity, or frequency of risk factors for the product under study or conduct of trial must be submitted within 15 days
Other Safety Reports

The G-ECBiomedRes indicate that ECs should monitor research, and will report to the National Bioethics Committee upon notification of an AE.

The CTRules and the G-KenyaCT state that the sponsor must also submit a safety report to the PPB once a year throughout the clinical trial, or upon request. The purpose of the annual safety report is to briefly describe all new safety information relevant to one (1) or more clinical trial(s), and to assess the safety conditions of the participants enrolled in these trial(s). The safety report must include a log of SAE and SUSAR events. The SAE and SUSAR log should include the following:

Patient Identification
Age
Date of recruitment into the study
Type of SAE or SUSAR
SAE or SUSAR start and end dates
Reason for reporting the event as an SAE or SUSAR
Relation to IP
SAE or SUSAR outcome
Note that the PPB may require more frequent reporting of the safety reports depending on the nature of the clinical trial being implemented. When this is the case, the PPB must communicate the required frequency to the PI and sponsor in writing.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

As per the G-KenyaCT and KEN-16, all SAEs and SUSARs must be reported to the PPB via the Pharmacovigilance Electronic Reporting System (PvERS) (KEN-6).

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

As stated in the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor and/or the principal investigator (PI) is required to send progress reports to the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) on an annual basis, or as may be required, from the date of the trial’s initiation. The progress report should contain the following:

Current status of the study
Summary of the participants screened (e.g., failed screenings, participants enrolled, withdrawn, or lost to follow-up, and other challenges)
Summary of protocol deviations and violations
Updated investigational product Investigator’s Brochure
Drug Safety Update Report
Copy of the latest Data Safety Management Board report
Copy of favorable opinion from the ethics committee (EC) on record
Copy of annual practice license for the investigators and pharmacists
Suspected, Unexpected, Serious Adverse Event (SUSAR) and Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Log
For multisite trials, per the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor or the representative must submit a summarized report for all of the sites and include the information listed above.

Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with requirements set forth in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14). As per KEN-14, the investigator should promptly provide written reports to the sponsor and the institutional EC on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to participants.

According to the G-KenyaCT, for annual renewal of the study, the sponsor or the representative must submit a copy of the progress report including the documents listed above. The request must also be accompanied by copies of annual practice licenses for the investigators and pharmacists, and a copy of valid insurance coverage for the participants. All documents must be submitted using the PPB’s Online Clinical Trials Registry System (KEN-16). The sponsor or the representative must receive an acknowledgement of this submission before proceeding with the study. These documents must be submitted to the PPB at least six (6) weeks prior to the expiration of the previous approval.

Pursuant to KEN-14, the investigator should submit written summaries of the trial status to the institutional EC annually, or more frequently, if requested.

Final Report

Per the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor must notify the PPB of the end of a clinical trial taking place at a Kenyan site within 15 days. After the trial has been conducted and closed, the applicant must submit an executive summary report of the study within 30 days. This should be followed by a clinical study report within 180 days of the study closure unless otherwise justified. The report must comply with the International Council for Harmonisation's ICH E3 format (KEN-13). The report must include a short but comprehensive summary of the trial’s essential findings and methodology and should also contain a layman’s summary. Additionally, the sponsor must inform the PPB of any results that will be publicly released at least 14 days before release. In addition, upon completion of the trial, as delineated in KEN-14, the investigator is required to submit a final report to the institutional EC summarizing the trial’s outcome.

For multi-site research, the G-ECBiomedRes requires all parties to decide on procedures for drafting a common final report and publication at the onset of the research. Individual sites or institutions must not publish any data until the appropriate authorities accept the combined report.

KEN-31 further indicates that the research license applicant must submit one (1) hard copy and upload a soft copy of the final research report to the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI) within one (1) year of the research’s completion.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
As per the G-KenyaCT, a sponsor is defined as an individual, a company, an institution, or an organization who takes legal responsibility for the initiation, management, and financing of a trial. According to the G-KenyaCT, a sponsor, in a written document, may agree to transfer all related activities of the clinical trial to designated research institutions. However, all responsibility for the trial lies with the sponsor. The G-ECBiomedRes indicates that sponsors may be foreign, but must comply with certain conditions including affiliating themselves to institutions recognized in Kenya.

Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with requirements set forth in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14). In accordance with KEN-14, Kenya permits a sponsor to transfer any or all of its trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO) and/or institutional site(s). However, the ultimate responsibility for the trial data’s quality and integrity always resides with the sponsor. Any trial-related responsibilities transferred to a CRO should be specified in a written agreement. The CRO should implement quality assurance and quality control.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Overview

The G-KenyaCT, which requires sponsors to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14), states that the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical trial and for ensuring that the investigator(s) are qualified by education, training, and experience.

Per the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, investigators must also meet the following requirements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Provide evidence of their qualifications and experience through an up-to-date curriculum vitae (CV)
Have a current practice license from the relevant regulatory authority
Be familiar with the characteristics and appropriate use of the investigational product (IP) as described in the protocol, current Investigator’s Brochure (IB), in the product information, and in other information sources
Have a clear understanding and willingness to obey the ethical, good clinical practice (GCP) and legal requirements in the conduct of the trial
Permit monitoring and auditing of the trial and inspection by the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) or appointed representatives
Keep a list of appropriately qualified persons to whom the investigator has delegated significant trial-related duties
The principal investigator (PI) must be an appropriately qualified and competent person having practical experience within the relevant professional area and who is responsible for the conduct of the clinical trial at a clinical site
The PI must have a degree in medicine, pharmacy, pharmacology, toxicology, biochemistry, dentistry, or a related discipline from a university recognized in Kenya
The PI must have a valid practice license from the relevant regulatory authority
The PI must have a valid professional indemnity cover
The PI must be a citizen of Kenya or a permanent resident in Kenya
A PI must have had previous experience as a co-investigator in at least two (2) trials in the relevant professional area
Have adequate time and resources to carry out the study (See Annex 6 of the G-KenyaCT for the PPB’s recommended format to document the investigator’s workload)
Further, the G-KenyaCT states that sponsors must ensure that investigators have had formal training in GCPs with proof that a GCP course was attended within the last two (2) years. If training has not been completed, it is the responsibility of the sponsor to organize this training prior to initiating the study. The investigators will need to provide evidence of having obtained this training. As delineated in KEN-14, prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s) and the institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and an IB. Furthermore, the sponsor must sign an agreement or contract with the participating institution(s). Additionally, the sponsor must define and allocate all study related duties and responsibilities to the relevant parties participating in the study. (See the Submission Content section for additional information on clinical trial application requirements.)

Institutional Registration

The STI-Act and the STI-Regs require research institutions to register with the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI) and obtain a Certificate of Registration. For detailed guidance on the vetting and approval process, see the STI-Regs and the G-InstitutionRegistration.

The application for registration of research institutions is provided in KEN-11, and the reporting tool for registered research institutions is provided in KEN-36. As indicated in KEN-40, institutions can apply for a license to establish a research institution on the NACOSTI eCitizen platform (KEN-12).

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

The G-ECBiomedRes requires that with collaborative research projects, the collaborating investigators, institutions, and countries must function as equal partners with safeguards to avoid exploitation of local researchers and participants. An external sponsoring agency should submit the research protocol to their country’s EC, as well as the Kenyan EC where the research is to be conducted. Further, this research must be responsive to the health needs of Kenya and reasonably accessible to the community in which the research was conducted. Consideration should be given to the sponsoring agency agreeing to maintain health services and faculties established for the purposes of the study in Kenya after the research has been completed. Such collaborative research must have a local/Kenyan co-principal investigator.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

The G-KenyaCT indicates that the PPB recommends establishing a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) to monitor trials in the following types of studies:

Where the endpoint is such that a highly favorable or unfavorable result, or even a finding of futility at an interim analysis, might ethically require the trial to be terminated early
When there are safety concerns due to the use of a particularly invasive treatment
Where there is prior information suggesting the possibility of serious toxicity with the study treatment
Where the participants involved represent a vulnerable population (e.g., children, pregnant women, elderly, terminally ill, or mentally incapacitated)
When the participants represent a population at higher risk of death or other serious outcomes
When the study is large, of long duration, and multi-center
KEN-14 states that a DSMB may be established to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial.

Per the G-KenyaCT, the DSMB must provide the following documentation to the PPB:

DSMB composition
Copy of DSMB charter
DSMB reports to be submitted to the PPB within two (2) weeks of its deliberations and in the request for annual approval
For multicenter trials, the G-ECBiomedRes requires that centralized data management and analysis should be planned as per G-WHO-DSMB.

Multicenter Studies

Per the G-KenyaCT, for multicenter studies in Kenya, the coordinating investigator should be a Kenyan resident and should assume full responsibility for the trial.

The G-ECBiomedRes requires that multicenter trials conducted simultaneously by several investigators at different sites follow the same protocol. Ideally, these trials should be initiated at the same time at all sites. The sponsor must provide the protocol to the investigators, who will accept the protocol in writing. If approved by the EC of the local host institution, the protocol may be modified to suit the local conditions. Meetings should be organized at the initial and intermediate stages of the trial to ensure uniform procedures at all sites. All sites and parties should also agree on procedures for publication of a final report. Research staff should receive training at every trial site on the uniform procedures. In addition, research staff at all sites should implement standard methods for recruitment and evaluation/monitoring of laboratory procedures and conduct of trial. There must be monitoring to ensure the sites are following the protocol, which must include measures to terminate the participation of some sites, if necessary. Finally, centralized data management and analysis should be planned as per G-WHO-DSMB.

Additional multicenter guidance is delineated in KEN-14:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor, and, if required, by the PPB, and given EC approval
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication among investigators is facilitated
Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Insurance

As set forth in the G-KenyaCT and the G-ECBiomedRes, the sponsor must provide insurance cover for the study participants and ensure that the clinical trial institution, contract research organization (CRO), and researchers have sufficient insurance cover for the clinical trial. Per the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor’s policies and procedures should address the treatment costs for trial participants in the event of trial-related injuries, and the sponsor should submit this information as part of the clinical trial application (see KEN-34). In addition, a no-fault insurance cover must be obtained for all controlled human infection studies. The International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14) guides sponsors on providing insurance. Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with requirements set forth in KEN-14.

Per the G-KenyaCT, for all sponsor-initiated studies, insurance coverage must be provided by an insurer registered by Kenya’s Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA), and a valid insurance certificate must be issued by the IRA prior to the trial’s initiation and cover the duration of the study. The insurance certificate must be submitted as evidence to the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB). The certificate must be properly executed by an insurance company under a valid insurance policy which makes explicit reference to the proposed study. In addition, the policy must grant coverage for any participant injury that is causally linked to trial activities. The policy must also cover the investigator(s)’ and the sponsor(s)’ liability in the trial, without excluding any damage which may be attributed to negligence. Moreover, self-insurance of the participants by other entities will not be sufficient.

Further, per the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor must ensure that the investigators and CROs have professional indemnity insurance coverage for the period of the trial. The host institution must also have in place sufficient insurance to meet the potential liability of its investigators, those acting on behalf of the investigators, and its research members.

Compensation

Injury or Death

As specified in the G-KenyaCT and the G-ECBiomedRes, the sponsor is responsible for providing compensation to research participants and/or their legal heirs in the event of trial-related injuries or death. Per the G-ECBiomedRes, participants are entitled to such financial or other assistance as would compensate them equitably for any temporary or permanent impairment or disability. In the case of adverse events, there should be proper assessment, evaluation, and compensation. The G-ECBiomedRes also indicates that when investigational vaccines contain active or live-attenuated micro-organisms, should participants in the control group contract the disease for which a vaccine is being tested, free treatment must be provided.

In addition, the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14) provides guidance for sponsors on providing compensation to research participants in the event of trial-related injuries or death. The sponsor must explain to participants the compensation and/or treatment available to them in the event of trial-related injuries.

Trial Participation

The G-ECBiomedRes defines compensation to include offers to participants, monetary or otherwise, to offset the time and inconvenience for participating in research.

Post-Trial Access

Per the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor must put in place measures to ensure that the study participants have access to successful investigational products for their disease condition before the products have received a marketing authorization in Kenya, especially for Phase III clinical trials. The G-ECBiomedRes indicates that when investigational vaccines contain active or live-attenuated micro-organisms, post-trial access to the vaccine should be available to the control group.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As stated in the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor is responsible for maintaining quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol, the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14), the STI-Regs, and other applicable regulatory requirements. QC should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been correctly processed. In addition, per the STI-Regs, all persons and research institutions (i.e., sponsors) undertaking research in Kenya must ensure the highest standards and quality of research for the realization of institutional mandates and national priorities.

In addition to complying with KEN-14, the G-KenyaCT indicates QA processes should be developed to ensure:

Regular and continuous monitoring of the study and the implementation of monitoring reports’ recommendations
Submission of the study monitoring plan to the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) during the initial submission of the application
The clinical trials research site must have valid registrations and approvals
Patient safety and confidentiality are not compromised
Analysis or evaluation of samples is performed in accordance with the protocol and good clinical practice (GCP) principles and, where applicable, the contract/agreement, the work instruction, and associated methods
Adherence to the laboratories’ policies and SOPs
Trial data is recorded and reported accurately, legibly, completely, and in a timely manner
Trial data is archived
Preparation of a work instruction detailing the procedures that will be used to conduct the analysis or evaluation prior to the initiation of sample analysis or evaluation, as necessary
Be built or adapted for the purpose
Have automated equipment for routine hematology, biochemistry, and serology tests
Have procedures for analyzer calibration and quality control
Regular maintenance of all the equipment, including point-of-care equipment
Have a procedure for transporting samples safely and quickly from clinical areas to the laboratory
Have written procedures for all assays, and to validate the assays
Reagents and consumables are used within their expiry dates based on a stock control procedure
Records are kept, including source documents and final reports
Have a procedure for authorizing and releasing results
Have a procedure for ‘flagging’ and notifying medical staff of abnormal results
Have a laboratory information management system, and validate and back up the system
Protective clothing and safety equipment are provided for staff
Have a central alarm system for all fridges and freezers
Have an internal audit program
Per KEN-14, the sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, focusing on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that includes:

During protocol development, identify processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results
Identify risks to critical trial processes and data
Evaluate the identified risks against existing risk controls
Decide which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept
Document quality management activities and communicate to those involved in or affected by these activities
Periodically review risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant
In the clinical study report, describe the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarize important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken
Per the G-KenyaCT protocol violations and protocol deviations must be reported to the PPB within seven (7) days of the principal investigator (PI) becoming aware of them. The details to be reported must include:

Date of the deviation/violation
Study participant(s) affected
Name of the treating physician
Detailed description of the deviation/violation
Indication whether the study participants were adversely affected by the deviation/violation
Explanation of why the deviation/violation occurred
Measures taken to address the deviation/violation
Measures taken to preclude future recurrence of the deviation/violation
In addition, see G-KenyaCT for information about medical care of trial participants during and following the clinical trial. Also see the Bft-Risk for a standardized approach for evaluating and reporting the balance between the benefits and risks of health products, which includes investigational products (IPs) undergoing clinical trial application.

The CT-Emrgcy provides guidance to sponsors, PIs, and institutions on the conduct of clinical trials during public health emergencies to maximize the safety of research participants, minimize risks to participants and the community, and ensure the integrity of the clinical trials. See CT-Emrgcy for details on a range of issues, including contingency planning, communication with participants, changes to studies, protocol deviations, reporting, and supply of IPs during a public health emergency.

Controlled Human Infection Studies

The G-KenyaCT also provides detailed information on controlled human infection studies (CHIS) requirements to ensure investigator/study personnel compliance with GCP and other QA/QC requirements, including the following:

The well characterized strain of an infectious agent should be administered at a controlled dose and by a specific route to carefully selected adult volunteers
The studies require safe and accurate microbiology, good clinical facilities, careful recruitment, and monitoring
Participants must be monitored for evidence of carriage or infection under medical supervision to anticipate or manage symptoms of disease and adverse events
The value of the information to be gained should clearly justify the risks and the study must have a risk mitigation plan
The investigators should be adequately qualified, trained, and experienced in the conduct of CHIS as well as treating patients with the infectious disease being investigated
For the complete list of requirements, see the G-KenyaCT.

The G-ECBiomedRes provides additional considerations when investigational vaccines contain active or live-attenuated micro-organisms:

The participant to be vaccinated should be given adequate information about the adverse effects.
Should participants in the control group contract the disease for which a vaccine is being tested, free treatment must be provided.
Because the risks associated with vaccines produced by recombinant DNA techniques are not completely known, PPB guidelines must be strictly followed.
Post-trial access to the vaccine should be available to the control group
Monitoring Requirements

As part of its QA system, the G-KenyaCT requires the sponsor to develop an internal audit program. The G-KenyaCT defines an audit as a systematic examination, carried out independently of those directly involved in the trial, to determine whether the conduct of a trial complies with the agreed study protocol and whether data reported are consistent with those on record at the site. Further, the sponsor is required to obtain agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. An investigator must, upon request from any properly authorized officer or employee of PPB at reasonable times, permit such officer or employee to have access to, and copy and verify any records or reports made by the investigator.

Per KEN-14, the sponsor should develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The extent and nature of monitoring is flexible and permits varied approaches that improve effectiveness and efficiency. The sponsor may choose onsite monitoring, a combination of onsite and centralized monitoring, or, where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan).

KEN-31 indicate that the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI) may conduct an evaluation, or cause an evaluation to be conducted, of a research study to assess and evaluate compliance with the conditions of the applicable research license.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

The G-KenyaCT indicates that the protocol should have a clear description of study stoppage rules indicating reasons, who makes the decision, and how the decision will be communicated to the PPB and the EC. If a trial is terminated by the PI or the sponsor, the PI or the sponsor must inform the PPB not later than 15 days following the termination date. The co-investigators must also be informed as soon as possible and should be advised in writing of potential risks to the research participants, and they must ensure that patients continue to receive medical care. The PPB must be provided with reason(s) for the termination and its impact on the proposed or ongoing trials with respect to the IP, including issues relating to IP accountability and disposal as well as record(s) maintenance. In addition, the PPB may withdraw the authorization to conduct a clinical trial if it finds that the safety of the participants is compromised or that the scientific reasons for conducting the trial have changed.

According to KEN-14, if it is discovered that noncompliance significantly affects or has the potential to significantly affect participant protection or reliability of trial results, the sponsor should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions. Further, the EC should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with requirements set forth in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14). As per KEN-14, when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor must ensure that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. Per KEN-14, the sponsor should base their approach to validate such systems on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use and the potential of the system to affect participant protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, the sponsor should maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) for the systems that cover setup, installation, and use. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the system users should be provided with training. Refer to KEN-14 for additional information.

Records Management

According to the G-KenyaCT, it is the responsibility of the investigator and the sponsor to archive safely all trial-related documentation. All Kenyan trial site-related documentation must be archived within the country and not exported. Additionally, the sponsor/applicant must inform the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB)’s Expert Committee on Clinical Trials (ECCT) in writing prior to destroying any trial documents. The notification must include the protocol number, start and end date, and the license number.

The G-KenyaCT states that study documents must be archived for a minimum of 10 years from the end of the study. Also, records must be made available to the PPB within three (3) days if there is a concern regarding the use of a clinical trial drug and/or a risk to the health of the clinical trial participant. In any other case, records must be provided within seven (7) days of request.

Per the STI-Regs, sponsors should store research findings and information regarding research systems in a designated location with clear labels of the subject area. Research findings must be documented in bound books or documents with the research title, author, year, and other relevant information clearly printed on the cover page. A report of research work by staff and the research institution must be submitted to the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI) within two (2) months after publication or compilation of the research report.

In addition, KEN-14 states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Responsible Parties

The DPA delineates that the “data controller” determines the purpose and means of processing personal data. The "data processor" processes personal data on behalf of the data controller. Data controllers and processors must be registered with the Kenya Data Commissioner. Per the DataProtect, an application for registration of a data controller or data processor must be on Form DPR1 (found in the First Schedule of DataProtect) with supporting materials and the required registration fees as specified in the Second Schedule. See the DataProtect for additional details on registration requirements.

Data Protection

Per the DPA, the data controller (sponsor) must ensure that personal data is:

Processed in accordance with the right to privacy of the data subject
Processed lawfully, fairly, and in a transparent manner in relation to any data subject
Collected for explicit, specified, and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a manner incompatible with those purposes
Adequate, relevant, and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which it is processed
Collected only where a valid explanation is provided whenever information relating to family or private affairs is required
Accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date, with every reasonable step being taken to ensure that any inaccurate personal data is erased or rectified without delay
Kept in a form that identifies the data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposes for which it was collected
Not transferred outside Kenya, unless there is proof of adequate data protection safeguards or consent from the data subject
The DataProtect, which implements the DPA, requires data controllers and data processors to develop, publish, and regularly update a policy on their personal data handling practices. The policy should include the nature of personal data collected and held, how a data subject may access their personal data, complaints handling mechanisms, the lawful purpose for processing personal data, and requirements for when personal data is to be transferred outside Kenya. Regarding cross-border transfers of data, a data controller or data processor who is a transferring entity must (before transferring personal data out of Kenya) ascertain that the transfer is necessary. This necessity decision should be based on considerations such as data protection safeguards, an adequacy decision made by the Data Commissioner, and if there is consent of the data subject.

Per the DataProtect, data controllers and/or data processors must retain personal data processed for a lawful purpose and only as long as may be reasonably necessary for the purpose for which the personal data is processed. A data controller or data processor must establish a personal data retention schedule with appropriate time limits and periodic reviews. When the retention period has ended, the personal data must be erased, anonymized, or pseudonymized.

See DataProtect for additional details on data protection, including data subject rights, data protection design and principles, notification of breaches, impact assessments, and exemptions.

See Parts IV-VII of the DPA for detailed requirements on data processing, sensitive personal data, exemptions, and transfer of personal data outside of Kenya. The G-ECBiomedRes requires compliance with the DPA.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

Per the DPA, the data controller (sponsor) or data processor must bear the burden of proof for establishing a data subject’s consent to the processing of their personal data for a specified purpose. For the purposes of processing personal data, consent means any manifestation of express, unequivocal, free, specific, and informed indication of the data subject’s wishes by a statement or by a clear affirmative action, signifying agreement to the processing of personal data relating to the data subject. Unless otherwise provided under the DPA, a data subject has the right to withdraw consent at any time. The withdrawal of consent must not affect the lawfulness of processing based on prior consent before its withdrawal.

The DataProtect requires data controllers and data processors to ensure that a data subject has the capacity to consent and voluntarily gives consent. In seeking consent (prior to the processing), the data subject should be informed of:

The identity of the data controller or data processor
The purpose of each of the processing operations for which consent is sought
The type of personal data that is collected and used
Information about the use of the personal data for automated decision-making, where relevant
The possible risks of data transfers due to absence of an adequacy decision or appropriate safeguards
Whether the personal data processed will be shared with third parties
The right to withdraw consent
The implications of providing, withholding, or withdrawing consent
Per the DataProtect, this information may be presented to the data subject through a written notice, oral statement, audio or video message. The data controller or a data processor must ensure that the data subject has the capacity to voluntarily give consent that is specific to the purpose of processing.

Children

The DPA indicates that in cases where the data subject is a minor, a person who has parental authority or a guardian may exercise personal data protection rights conferred on the subject. With regard to data processing, the DPA requires that every data controller (sponsor) or data processor must not process personal data relating to a child unless consent is given by the child's parent or guardian and the processing is in a manner that protects and advances the rights and best interests of the child. A data controller or data processor must incorporate appropriate mechanisms for age verification and consent to process personal data of a child, including available technology, volume of personal data processed, proportion of such personal data likely to be that of a child, possibility of harm to a child arising out of processing of personal data, and other factors as may be specified by the Kenya Data Commissioner.

Mentally Impaired

The DPA indicates that in cases where the data subject has a mental or other disability, a person duly authorized to act as the participant’s guardian or administrator may exercise personal data protection rights conferred on the subject.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Kenyan clinical trials, a freely given informed consent must be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the CTRules, the G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14). (Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with the requirements set forth in KEN-14.) The informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by a National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI)-accredited institutional ethics committee (EC). The ICF must be provided to the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) with the clinical trial application. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.)

The CTRules, the G-KenyaCT, and the G-ECBiomedRes state that the investigator, or the designated representative, must provide detailed research study information to the participant or legal representative/guardian. Per G-ECBiomedRes, all individual consent must be written and, in no case, should collective community agreement or the consent of a community leader or other authority substitute for an individual informed consent. The G-KenyaCT and the G-ECBiomedRes also specify that the oral and written information concerning the trial, including the ICF, should be easy to understand and presented without coercion or unduly influencing a potential participant to enroll in the clinical trial. None of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive the legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or the representatives from their liabilities for any negligence. The participant or legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate.

Re-Consent

According to the CTRules, the G-KenyaCT, and KEN-14, any change in the ICF due to a protocol modification should be approved by the EC before such changes are implemented. The participant or legal representative/guardian will also be required to re-sign the revised ICF and receive a copy of any amended documentation.

Language Requirements

As stated in the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, the ICF content should be presented in either English or Kiswahili, and the local spoken language of the area, where applicable. Copies of the English ICF should be submitted to the PPB and to the EC.

Documenting Consent

The CTRules and the G-KenyaCT state that the participant or legal representative/guardian, and the person who conducted the informed consent discussion should sign and personally date the ICF. Where the participant is illiterate, and/or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, verbal consent should be obtained in the presence of and countersigned by an impartial witness. Before participating in the study, the participant should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF, and any other written information provided during the informed consent process. The participant or legal representative/guardian should also receive a copy of any updates to the signed and dated ICF.

According to KEN-14, where the participant is illiterate and/or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. The witness should sign and date the ICF after the following steps have occurred:

The written ICF and any other written information to be provided to the participant is read and explained to the participant or legal representative/guardian
The participant or legal representative/guardian have orally consented to the participant’s involvement in the trial, and has signed and dated the ICF, if capable of doing so
Before participating in the study, the participant or legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF.

Waiver of Consent

No information is available.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Based on the CTRules, the G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14), the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Title of the project and that the study involves research and an explanation of its nature and purpose
The expected duration of the participant’s participation
The participant’s responsibilities in participating in the trial
Experimental aspects of the study
Approximate number of participants involved in the trial
Trial treatment schedule and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
Principal investigator(s), institution, and ethics committee (EC) contact information, the person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
Any foreseeable risks or discomforts to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
Any expected benefits or prorated payment to the participant; if no benefit is expected, the participant should also be made aware of this
Alternative procedures or treatment that may be available to the participant, including a statement on disclosure of appropriate alternative procedures or courses of treatment that might be advantageous to participants when the research involves non-validated procedures, devices, or therapies
Compensation and/or medical treatment available to the participant or the family or dependents in the event of a trial-related injury
Any additional costs to the participant that may result from participation in the research
The extent to which confidentiality records identifying the participant will be maintained, and if the results of the trial are published, the participant’s identity will remain confidential
That the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) will be granted direct access to the participant’s original medical records to verify clinical trial procedures and/or data without violating the participant’s confidentiality
The details on storage and exportation of biological samples, if applicable
The details on storage and ownership of personal data
Information about unblinding, if applicable
The extent of the investigator’s responsibility, if any, to provide medical services to the participant
That therapy will be provided free of charge for specified types of research-related injury, including the investigators’ responsibilities in this regard
That participation is voluntary, the participant may withdraw at any time, and refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits, or reduction in the level of care to which the participant is otherwise entitled
That the participant will be informed about the dissemination of findings and about any publication of the participant’s medical information, including photographs and pedigree charts
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without consent
That the participant or legal representative/guardian will be notified in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the study which may affect the participant’s willingness to continue
Consent to incomplete disclosure, for example, if it is necessary to inform participants that some information is being withheld deliberately and the reasons for that decision; an offer to disclose the purpose at the conclusion of the study can be made
Note that per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with requirements set forth in KEN-14.

In addition, the CTRules delineates that if the potential participant is a child, the ICF must also contain these elements:

The pathophysiology of the disease or subject of the clinical trial
The methods of diagnosis
The currently available treatment or prevention strategy in the pediatric population
The incidence and prevalence of the disease or subject of the clinical trial in the overall population and in the pediatric population
The evidence and assumptions on key differences between the disease or subject of the clinical trial in the overall population and the pediatric population
Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (KEN-33) principles upheld in the CTRules, the G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14), Kenya’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. A participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process. Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with requirements set forth in KEN-14.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the CTRules, the G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, and KEN-14, a participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As delineated in the CTRules, the G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, and KEN-14, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

The DPA further indicates that data subjects have a right to:

Be informed of how their personal data is to be used
Access their personal data in custody of the data controller (sponsor) or data processor
Object to the processing of all or part of their personal data
Correct false or misleading data
Delete false or misleading data about them
The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per the G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, and KEN-14, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The G-KenyaCT, KEN-14, and the G-ECBiomedRes state that the participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries. Further, the G-ECBiomedRes requires that the ethics committee contact information also be provided.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The G-ECBiomedRes and KEN-14 state that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of the participant’s health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society. KEN-14 upholds the Declaration of Helsinki (KEN-33). (See the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.)

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
The G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14), make provisions to protect the rights of a research participant during the informed consent process when the procedure is complicated by emergencies. Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with KEN-14. As delineated in the G-KenyaCT and the G-ECBiomedRes, in an emergency, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) cannot be obtained from the research participant, the consent of the legal representative/guardian should be obtained. If the prior consent of the participant or legal representative/guardian cannot be obtained, the participant’s enrollment should follow measures specified in the protocol, and/or elsewhere, to ensure compliance with ethics committee (EC) and the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) requirements. The G-ECBiomedRes requires that the principle of clinical equipoise be applied, which essentially means the participant is not any worse off by enrolling.

During a public health emergency, the G-KenyaCT stipulates that the informed consent of participants must be obtained in individuals capable of giving informed consent. The CT-Emrgcy includes safeguards to protect clinical trial participants during a public health emergency, including the recommendation to reconsent if there are amendments as a result of the emergency.

Per KEN-14, in an emergency, if the signed ICF has not been obtained from the participant or legal representative/guardian, or if an effective treatment is lacking but the investigational product could address the participant’s emergency needs, the clinical trial may be conducted. However, the method used on the participant must be explained clearly in the trial protocol, and the EC must approve the protocol in advance. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible, and consent to continue and other consent should be requested, as appropriate.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Overview

As per the G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14), in all Kenyan clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. Vulnerable populations include those participants with diminished autonomy whose decision to participate in a clinical trial may be unduly influenced by the expectation of benefits associated with participation or by coercion. This may include, but is not limited to, children/minors, pregnant women, neonates, fetuses, medical students, members of the uniformed forces, prisoners, orphans, homeless populations, unemployed, internally displaced persons, economically or educationally disadvantaged persons, marginalized social groups, individuals with terminal illnesses, and the mentally challenged. KEN-14 also includes members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable participants include persons in nursing homes, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent. Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with requirements set forth in KEN-14.

Elderly Persons

The G-ECBiomedRes defines an elderly/senior citizen as a person who has attained the age of 65 years. Their physical or mental state may affect their ability to make voluntary decisions regarding their participation in research projects. Such research involving elderly/senior citizens must comply with the following requirements:

Strict adherence to ethical principles
The risk-benefit ratio must be favorable to the research participant
The participants must be protected from gross violation of human rights
Persons in Dependent Groups

Per the G-ECBiomedRes, research involving data collection by superiors on their subordinates involves relationships such as employer-employee, teacher-students, supervisor-staff, sponsor-dependent, and parent-children. This relationship impairs independent consent by the participants leading to complacency. Therefore, research involving the superior/subordinate relationships must fulfill the following requirements:

The superior must strictly follow ethical principles to avoid undue pressure
Subordinates must be protected from gross violation of human rights
The trial design must be based on a need-to-know principle and improve the conditions of the participants
Persons in Low-Resource Communities

The G-ECBiomedRes provides the following requirements related to conducting research on participants in low-resource settings:

Persons in such settings should not be involved in research that could be carried out reasonably well in developed communities
The research should be responsive to the health needs and priorities of the community in which it is to be implemented
Undue inducement to participate in the research must be avoided at all costs
Armed Forces

The G-ECBiomedRes stipulates that research involving the members of the armed forces may be vulnerable because of the conditions of their service, which may affect their ability to make voluntary decisions regarding their participation in research. Such research must be conducted to ensure that:

Participants are protected from gross violations of human rights
There is strict adherence to ethical principles
There is at least one (1) member of the ethics committee approving such research who is an enlisted and authoritative member of the armed forces
Terminally Ill

Per the G-ECBiomedRes, research involving participants who are terminally ill with an incurable medical condition are vulnerable. Their state may affect their ability to make voluntary decisions regarding their participation in research. Such research can only be conducted when:

The objectives of the project(s) cannot be achieved using another non-vulnerable group
There is strict adherence to ethical principles
The risk-benefit ratio should be favorable to the research participant
See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
According to the G-KenyaCT, a minor is someone under 18 years of age. As set forth in the G-KenyaCT, the G-ECBiomedRes, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14), when the research participant is a minor, informed consent should be obtained from the parent/guardian. Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with requirements set forth in KEN-14. The informed consent forms, assent forms, and the patient information sheets should be in a language that the parent/guardian clearly understand. All pediatric participants should be fully informed about the trial and its risks and benefits in a language and terms that they are easily able to understand.

Per the G-KenyaCT, a minor should take part in the informed consent procedure in a way tailored to their age and mental maturity. If capable, the participant should sign and personally date the written informed consent. In addition, consent given by pediatric participants should not be considered valid without prior approval by the ethics committee (EC).

The CTRules, the G-ECBiomedRes, and the G-KenyaCT state that a study may only be conducted on minors if several conditions are fulfilled including (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Pediatric participants will not be involved in research that might be equally carried out in adults
The purpose of the research is to generate knowledge relevant to the health needs of children
The parent/guardian must provide proxy consent and ensure assent has been obtained to the extent of the child’s capabilities. However, if the minor refuses to participate after proxy consent is given, the minor’s refusal must be respected unless there is no other medical alternative from which the minor could benefit
The risk presented by interventions not intended to benefit the minor is low and commensurate with the importance of the knowledge to be gained
Interventions that are intended to provide therapeutic benefit are likely to be at least as advantageous to the individual child as any available alternative
No incentives or financial inducements are given to the participant or parent/guardian except to provide compensation for expenses and loss of earnings directly related to the participation in the trial
Additionally, per the G-KenyaCT, the trial should also address the following considerations:

Provide useful answers to the study population
The medicine satisfies a need for the population being studied
Children are adequately monitored and protected
If there is no direct benefit to the child, or there is no more than minimal risk to the participant(s)
Trial results will be published
End-of-trial treatment provisions will be made
Assent Requirements

As delineated in the G-KenyaCT, before undertaking research involving children, the investigator must ensure that the agreement (assent) of each child has been obtained to the extent of the child’s capabilities, and a child’s refusal to participate or continue in the research must be respected. Assent is defined as a child’s affirmative agreement to participate in research, where the child is below the age of the majority but old enough to understand the proposed research in general, its expected risks and possible benefits, and the activities expected of them as participants. The G-ECBiomedRes provides that in children above seven (7) years and below 18 years where the parent(s)/guardian(s) gives proxy consent, assent must be obtained from the child.

For an example of an accredited EC’s assent requirements, see the Kenyatta National Hospital-University of Nairobi (KNH-UoN) Ethics and Research Committee’s sample minor assent form (KEN-17).

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with the requirements set forth in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14). In accordance with KEN-14, informed consent requirements for conducting clinical trials with pregnant or nursing women or fetuses follow the general requirements listed in the Required Elements section. Specifically, the informed consent form should include a statement on the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant.

As per the G-ECBiomedRes, research involving pregnant, lactating, and breastfeeding women may pose compromised long-term outcomes for the child. In addition, potential parent(s) can make decisions on behalf of the fetus(es), embryo(s), and zygote(s).

For fetal, embryo, and zygote(s) cases, research should be limited as follows:

Cases that present no harm or offer assistance to the life system of the participants
No procedures should be permitted that are likely to harm them
A fetus ex-utero and alive, embryo, and zygote must not be involved in research unless it is intended to enhance the life of that fetus, embryo, and zygote, or unless the research involves no risk to them
Additionally, the following guidelines must be followed for research involving pregnant, lactating, and breastfeeding women:

The research carries no more than minimal risk to the fetuses or nursing infants
Pregnant or nursing women should generally not be clinical trial participants except where such trials are designed to protect or advance the health of the pregnant/nursing women or fetuses/nursing infants, and for which women who are not pregnant or nursing would not be suitable participants
The justification for such research should be that participants must not be arbitrarily deprived of the opportunity to benefit from investigational drugs, vaccines, or other agents that promise therapeutic or preventive benefits
Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Per the G-ECBiomedRes and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14), prisoners are considered vulnerable because incarceration could affect their ability to make a voluntary decision regarding participation in research. Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with requirements set forth in KEN-14. A research study involving prisoners should ensure that these prospective participants are informed and given the opportunity to make their own decisions without any interference or reprisals from a higher authority. The ethics committee must also ensure that the study will be independently monitored to assure the dignity and rights of the prisoners involved in the research.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
As per the G-ECBiomedRes and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14), an ethics committee (EC) within the relevant institution must approve the participation of adult research participants who are incapable by reason of physical and mental capacity to give consent. Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with requirements set forth in KEN-14.

In addition, as delineated in the G-ECBiomedRes, a research study may involve participants with mental incapacities or behavioral disorders under the following conditions:

Such research could not be carried out equally well with individuals who are in possession of their full mental faculties
The knowledge gained would be relevant to the health needs of persons with mental or behavioral disorders
The participant’s consent has been obtained to the extent of the participant’s capabilities, and a prospective participant’s refusal to participate is always respected
In the case of incompetent individuals, informed consent must be obtained from a legal guardian or other duly authorized person
The degree of risk attached to the intervention not intended to benefit the individual participant is low and commensurate with the importance of knowledge to be gained
Interventions that are intended to provide therapeutic benefit are likely to be at least as advantageous to the individual participant as any alternative
Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
The G-KenyaCT defines an investigational product (IP) as any pharmaceutical product, including a new product or existing product for a new indication, in the form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial, including a product with a marketing authorization when used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a way different from the approved form, or when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Manufacturing

According to the PPA and the G-KenyaCT, the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of all drug products, including investigational products (IPs) in Kenya. Per the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, an IP must be manufactured in accordance with the requirements of good manufacturing practice (GMP). The CTRules requires a sponsor to immediately notify the PPB in writing when a pharmaceutical or chemical alteration may affect the quality, safety, or efficacy of the IP product during an ongoing clinical trial. The G-KenyaCT states that the sponsor must submit the IP dossier directly to the PPB or may submit it through the principal investigator. The IP dossier must be prepared as per the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14), which is required per G-KenyaCT. The manufacture of IPs may be subject to GMP inspection by the PPB in the same way as in the case of marketed drug products. See the G-KenyaCT for detailed chemistry and manufacturing information to be provided to the PPB if the IP has not been registered with the PPB.

KEN-14 also requires IPs to be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable GMPs and used in accordance with the approved protocol.

Per the PPA, the PPB is authorized to regulate the manufacturing of medicine, including:

Ensure that all medicinal products manufactured in, imported into, or exported from the country conform to prescribed standards of quality, safety, and efficacy
Ensure that the personnel, premises, and practices employed in the manufacture, storage, marketing, distribution, and sale of medicinal substances comply with the defined codes of practice and other prescribed requirements
Grant or revoke licenses for the manufacture, importation, exportation, distribution, and sale of medicinal substances
Inspect and license all manufacturing premises, importing and exporting agents, wholesalers, distributors, pharmacies (including those in hospitals and clinics), and other retail outlets
See the KenyaGMP, for PPB’s compilation of recommended World Health Organization GMP guidelines to help comply with GMP requirements and prepare for an inspection, including for manufacture of IPs.

Import

Per the PPA and the ImpExp, the PPB is authorized to regulate the import and export of health products and technologies, including IPs. As per the ImpExp and the G-KenyaCT, to obtain an import permit for a clinical trial, the sponsor or investigator must submit an application online to the Kenya Trade Network Agency’s Kenya TradeNet Single Window System (KEN-28). The following documents must be submitted (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The proforma invoice or invoice
The ethics committee favorable opinion letter
The Expert Committee on Clinical Trials approval letter from the PPB
Registration of the institution where the research is being undertaken
The G-KenyaCT states that the sponsor must submit to the PPB a copy of the endorsed clinical trial import permit and/or evidence of delivery to the approved investigator(s)/trial center(s) on importation and supply of each consignment of the product. The product must only be supplied to the investigator(s) at the trial site(s) named in the clinical trial import license application for the purpose and use as stated in the said application. Prior PPB notification and approval is required for changes in the investigator, trial site, or protocol. The sponsor must inform PPB of any change in information, or any information received that casts doubt on the continued validity of the data, which was submitted with, or in connection with the application for the import permit. The sponsor must also inform the PPB of any decision to discontinue the trial to which the permit relates and state the reason for the decision. See KEN-8 for additional details on the procedures for obtaining an import license.

Per the CTRules, the import of an IP must comply with the applicable regulatory requirements to ensure integrity and accountability of the products. The PPB may revoke or suspend an import permit if the IP was manufactured in conditions not consistent with GMP; if the clinical trial was discontinued; or if the sponsor provided false information.

Please note: Kenya is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (KEN-3), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see KEN-15.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

In accordance with the CTRules and the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor must provide an up-to-date Investigator’s Brochure (IB). An updated IB and Drug Safety Update Report (DSUR) must be submitted whenever available but at least once a year as a notification to the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) or when there are substantial changes to the previous version.

Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with the requirements set forth in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14). As specified in the G-KenyaCT and KEN-14, the IB must provide coverage of the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties
The pharmacological aspects including its metabolites in all animal species tested
The pharmacokinetics and metabolism including its biological transformation in all animal species tested
Toxicological effects in any animal species tested under a single dose study, a repeated dose study, or a special study
Results of clinical pharmacokinetic studies
Information regarding safety, pharmacodynamics, efficacy, and dose responses that were obtained from previous clinical trials in humans
The G-KenyaCT indicates that the sponsor must also follow the guidance contained in KEN-14.

Quality Management

In accordance with the G-KenyaCT, a good manufacturing practice (GMP) certificate must be provided by a competent authority from the country of manufacture to the PPB in the clinical trial application. At a minimum, the GMP certificate should include the competent authority’s name and contact details, address of the manufacturing site, date of inspection, and validity period. Certificates of Analysis (CoAs) must also be provided to the PPB for all investigational products (IPs) and comparator products. Per KEN-14, the sponsor must maintain a CoA to document the identity, purity, and strength of the IP(s) to be used in the clinical trial.

See the G-KenyaCT for detailed chemistry and manufacturing information to be provided to the PPB if the IP has not been registered with the PPB. In addition, see Cert-Emrgcy for information about good clinical practice (GCP) and GMP certifications during emergencies.

(See Product Management section for additional information on sponsor requirements).

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Per the G-KenyaCT, investigational products (IPs) used in Kenyan clinical trials must be properly labelled. A final copy/version of the labelling must be submitted to the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) for approval and should contain the following minimum information:

Statement indicating that the product is for “clinical trial purpose only”
Recommended storage conditions
Protocol code or identification
Name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor, contract research organization, or investigator (the main contact for information on the product, clinical trial, and emergency unblinding)
Pharmaceutical dosage form, route of administration, quantity of dosage units, and in the case of open trials, the name/identifier and strength/potency
The batch and/or code number to identify the contents and packaging operation
A trial reference code allowing identification of the trial, site, investigator, and sponsor, if not given elsewhere
The trial participant identification number/treatment number and, where relevant, the visit number
The name of the investigator (if not included above)
Directions for use (reference may be made to a leaflet or other explanatory document intended for the trial participant or person administering the product)
Period of use (use-by date, expiry date, or re-test date as applicable), in month/year format and in a manner that avoids any ambiguity
The complete physical address of the manufacturing site
As indicated in the G-KenyaCT, it is recommended that an IP is not re-labeled wherever possible. It is, however, accepted that in certain cases it is necessary to re-label and the PPB will review applications for the extension of expiration dates based on sufficient evidence being provided by the applicant that an extended expiration date is warranted. A written justification and evidence should be provided to the PPB. Any re-labelling of remaining IPs from previously manufactured batches must be performed in accordance with good manufacturing practice (GMP) principles and is limited to an extension of the expiration date where sufficient evidence is available to support such extension. Any request for re-labelling should be accompanied by a certificate of analysis of the product from a PPB-recognized laboratory or World Health Organization (WHO) prequalified laboratories (KEN-18). After approval, the re-labelling must be carried out under the supervision of a pharmaceutical inspector on the ground. In case of use-date extension, an additional label should be affixed to the IP to indicate the new use date and repeat the batch number. It may be superposed on the old use date, but not on the original batch number. PPB will not approve re-labelling of a product if the proposed additional label obscures the original labelling. At all times, the original label should be visible. This operation may be performed onsite by the clinical trial monitor(s) or the clinical trial site pharmacist, in accordance with specific and standard operating procedures. The operation should be checked by a second person. Documented evidence of this additional labelling should be available in the trial documentation and in the batch records. KEN-34 indicates that all documents submitted to the PPB in a clinical trial application should be in English, including a pictorial sample of the IP with the labeling text.

The International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14), which the G-KenyaCT requires following, states that the IP must be coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable. The IPs must also be suitably packaged in a manner that will prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

Per the PPA, the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) is responsible for the regulation of investigational products (IPs), including all matters relating to the safety, packaging, and distribution of medicines. The PPB must ensure that all medicinal products manufactured in, imported into, or exported from the country conform to prescribed standards of quality, safety, and efficacy. Further, the PPB must ensure that the personnel, premises, and practices employed in the manufacture and storage of IPs complies with prescribed requirements.

Per the G-KenyaCT, research must be conducted in accordance with requirements set forth in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14). As defined in the G-KenyaCT and KEN-14, the sponsor must ensure the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Timely delivery of IPs to the investigator(s)
Records that document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IPs are maintained
A system for retrieving IPs and documenting that this retrieval is maintained
A system for the disposition of unused IPs is maintained
Steps taken to ensure that the IPs are stable over the period of use
Sufficient quantities of the IPs used in the trials are maintained
To the extent stability permits, samples should be retained either until the analyses of the trial data are complete or as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), whichever represents the longer retention period.

As defined in the G-KenyaCT and KEN-14, the sponsor must also supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the IPs, including the comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable. The sponsor or the representative should not supply either party with the IP(s) until approval from the PPB and a favorable opinion letter from the local and national ethics committees (ECs) are obtained. In addition, the G-KenyaCT requires the following supply, storage, and handling processes:

Analysis or evaluation of samples is performed in accordance with the protocol and, where applicable, the contract/agreement, the work instruction, and associated methods
Adherence to the laboratories, policies, and standard operating procedures (SOPs)
Prior to the initiation of sample analysis or evaluation, it is often necessary to prepare a work instruction detailing the procedures, which will be used to conduct the analysis or evaluation
Have automated equipment for routine hematology, biochemistry, and serology tests
Have procedures for analyzer calibration and quality control
Regularly maintain all the equipment, including point-of-care equipment
Have a procedure for transporting samples safely and quickly from clinical areas to the laboratory
Have written procedures for all assays, and validate the assays
Have a stock control procedure to make sure that reagents and consumables are used within their expiry dates
Keep records, including source documents and final reports
Have a laboratory information management system, and validate and backup the system
Provide protective clothing and safety equipment for staff
Have a central alarm system for all fridges and freezers
Have an internal audit program
The G-KenyaCT also states that the sponsor must submit to the PPB a copy of the endorsed Clinical Trial Import License and/or evidence of delivery to the approved investigator(s)/institution(s) upon importing and supplying each product consignment. In addition, the IP must only be supplied to the investigator(s)/institution(s) named in the application for the Clinical Trial Import License/Clinical Trial Exemption for the purpose and use specified. The sponsor must inform the PPB in the event of any information changes including:

Information the sponsor receives that casts doubt on the continued validity of the submitted data
Information associated with the Clinical Trial Import License
See the G-KenyaCT for additional information on principal investigator requirements relating to the Clinical Trial Import License.

Record Requirements

As per the G-KenyaCT, the sponsor is required to maintain records that document IP(s) shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction. The sponsor must also maintain a system for retrieving IPs and documenting this retrieval, and maintain a system for the disposition of unused IPs.

According to the G-KenyaCT, IP manufacturers or importers must also retain samples for each batch of bulk product, and the packaging components used for each finished batch, for at least two (2) years following the trial. The sponsor should maintain sufficient samples from each batch and keep a record of their analyses and characteristics for reference so that, if necessary, an independent laboratory could reconfirm the same data.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Specimens are not defined in the Kenyan regulations. However, per KEN-26, the Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI) identifies biological samples and specimens as including, but not limited to, blood samples, saliva, breast milk samples, mosquito parts samples, biological cultures, tissue and tissue samples, hair samples, human stool, and environmental samples used in human health research.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Import/Export

Per the G-ECBiomedRes, biological material must not be imported nor exported without proper justification and authorization, which includes a signed material transfer agreement (MTA) approved by the relevant institutions and deposited with the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI). For exports, a Kenyan investigator must be included in the team that is conducting the research in the recipient country. All biological samples and data collected during research belong to the local participating institutions and country.

In addition, KEN-37 has indicated that Kenya’s Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB) will approve of an export for overseas research if the following requirements are met:

PPB initial approval letter or annual approval letter
Ethics committee (EC) approval letter
MTA
Study protocol with a summary justification for the participants' sample exportation
Informed consent form that highlights the areas where study participants are informed about the exportation of their samples
The G-KenyaCT states that in the case of transfer of materials during research involving children, the sponsor or the representative or the principal investigator should provide to the EC an MTA including, but not limited to, the following information:

Identification of the provider and recipient
Definition of the trial and how the material will and will not be used
Maintenance of confidentiality of background of supporting data or information, if any
Indemnification and insurance
In addition, KEN-26 provides an example of the Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)'s procedures for handling requests to ship biological samples or specimens. KEN-17 also provides an example of an MTA form from the Kenyatta National Hospital-University of Nairobi (KNH-UoN) Ethics and Research Committee.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 29, 2025
Detailed information is currently unavailable regarding Kenya’s Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB)’s requirements for obtaining informed consent from participants prior to collecting, storing, or using their biological sample(s). However, the G-KenyaCT states that for research involving children, the sponsor or the representative or the principal investigator should provide examples of patient information leaflets and informed consent forms (ICF) to the ethics committee (EC) for any proposed archiving of biological specimens for later research, or for genetics research.

The G-ECBiomedRes requires that participants are made aware of the use of personal data through informed consent, including secondary data and biological material in biobanks. The secondary use of data requires approval by an accredited EC. The investigator must obtain consent from the participants for the new study. For situations where this is not practicable, the relevant accredited EC can approve a waiver of individual consent following confirmation that the participants had previously consented to storage of the biological samples/data, and that this data is delinked from personal identifiers. In cases where the sample is stored in a foreign institution, the collaborating EC should also conduct its own deliberation. Researchers sending samples abroad must ensure that consent for transfer of materials was obtained during collection of the samples and that the collaborating EC gave approval.

See KEN-4 for Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)'s sample ICF that includes guidance on specimens. As another example, see KEN-17 for the Kenyatta National Hospital-University of Nairobi (KNH-UoN) Ethics and Research Committee’s form and guidance on genetic research and biobanking.

See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent.

Requirements
(Legislation) Data Protection Act, 2019 (DPA) (Effective November 25, 2019)
Parliament
(Legislation) Pharmacy and Poisons Act, Chapter 244 (PPA) (Amended through December 11, 2023)
Parliament
(Legislation) Science, Technology and Innovation Act, 2013 (No. 28 of 2013) (STI-Act) (Effective June 24, 2013)
Parliament
(Regulation) Data Protection (General) Regulations, 2021 (No. 263); Data Protection (Complaints Handling and Enforcement Procedures) Regulations, 2021 (No. 264), and Data Protection (Registration of Data Controllers and Data Processors) Regulations, 2021 (No. 265) (DataProtect) (No. 263 – Effective December 31, 2021, No. 264 – Effective December 31, 2021, and No. 265 – Effective February 11, 2022)
Office of the Data Protection Commissioner
(Regulation) Pharmacy and Poisons (Conduct of Clinical Trials) Rules, 2022 (No. 95) (CTRules) (June 9, 2022)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Regulation) The Science, Technology and Innovation (Registration and Accreditation of Research Institutions) Regulations, 2014 (STI-Regs) (August 1, 2014)
National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation
(Guidance) Guidance Document on Regulatory Measures on GMP, GCP and GDP Certification During Emergencies (Cert-Emrgcy) (Effective February 1, 2022)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Guidance) Guideline on Benefit-Risk Assessment of Health Products and Technologies (Rev. No. 0) (Bft-Risk) (January 2023)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Guidance) Guideline on Import and Export of Health Products and Technologies (Rev. No. 1) (ImpExp) (Effective February 21, 2025)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Guidance) Guidelines for Accreditation of Institutional Ethics Review Committees in Kenya (G-ECAccred) (October 2017)
National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation
(Guidance) Guidelines for Inspection of Contract Research Organization (Rev. No. 0) (CRO-Inspect) (Effective February 14, 2022)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Conduct of Clinical Trials During Public Health Emergencies and Pandemics in Kenya (Rev. No. 0) (CT-Emrgcy) (Effective February 1, 2022)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Conduct of Clinical Trials in Kenya (Rev. No. 4) (G-KenyaCT) (Effective October 1, 2022)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Guidance) Kenya Good Manufacturing Practices Guidelines (Rev. No. 1) (KenyaGMP) (April 2023)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Guidance) Manual for Registration of Research Institutions in Kenya (G-InstitutionRegistration) (November 2016)
National Commission for Science, Technology, and Innovation
(Guidance) National Guidelines for Ethical Conduct of Biomedical Research Involving Human Participants in Kenya (G-ECBiomedRes) (January 2020)
National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation
(Guidance) Operational Guidelines for the Establishment and Functioning of Data and Safety Monitoring Boards (G-WHO-DSMB) (2005)
World Health Organization
Additional Resources
(Document) Checklist for Submission of Clinical Trials Applications for Authorization (KEN-34) (2020)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Document) Checklist for Submitting a Request for Annual Approval (KEN-35) (2020)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Document) Declaration by Applicant (KEN-1) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Document) Declaration of Financial Disclosure/Conflict of Interest by PI (KEN-2) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Document) KEMRI SERU ICF Template (KEN-4) (Version 6.0) (May 19, 2025)
Kenya Medical Research Institute
(Document) NACOSTI Service Charter (KEN-5) (2018)
National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (KEN-3) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (KEN-33) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (KEN-14) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports E3 (KEN-13) (Step 4 Version) (November 30, 1995)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with Pharmacy and Poisons Board (December 2021) (KEN-37)
(Webpage) Accredited Institutional Ethics Review Committees (IERCs) (KEN-25) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation
(Webpage) Application for a Research License (KEN-31) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation
(Webpage) Country Profile: Kenya (KEN-15) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) eCitizen Login Page (KEN-12) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
Government of Tanzania
(Webpage) Import of Pharmaceutical Products (KEN-8) (Current as of August 27, 2025)
Kenya Trade Network Agency
(Webpage) Kenya TradeNet Single Window System (KEN-28) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
Kenya Trade Network Agency
(Webpage) KNH-UoN Ethics and Research Committee – E-Resources (KEN-17) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
Kenyatta National Hospital and University of Nairobi Ethics and Research Review Committee
(Webpage) NACOSTI – Contact (KEN-29) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation
(Webpage) NACOSTI – eCitizen (KEN-40) (Current as of August 27, 2025)
National Commission for Science, Technology, and Innovation
(Webpage) NACOSTI – Frequently Asked Questions (KEN-30) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
National Commission for Science, Technology, and Innovation
(Webpage) NACOSTI – Mandate & Functions (KEN-32) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation
(Webpage) Newly Accredited ISERCs in Kenya (KEN-38) (Last Updated May 11, 2023)
National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation
(Webpage) Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (KEN-19) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
Pan African Clinical Trials Registry
(Webpage) Pharmacy and Poisons Board - Online Clinical Trials Registry (KEN-16) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Webpage) Pharmacy and Poisons Board - Our Contacts (KEN-22) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Webpage) Pharmacy and Poisons Board – About Us (KEN-20) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Webpage) Pharmacy and Poisons Board – Clinical Trials (KEN-21) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
(Webpage) Quality Control Laboratories for Medicines (KEN-18) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
World Health Organization
(Webpage) Registration of Research Institutions in Kenya (KEN-39) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
National Commission for Science, Technology, and Innovation
(Webpage) RIMS Research Information Management System (KEN-24) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
National Commission for Science, Technology, and Innovation
(Webpage) Scientific and Ethics Review Unit (SERU) - FAQs (KEN-27) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
Kenya Medical Research Institute
(Webpage) The Scientific and Ethics Review Unit (SERU) (KEN-26) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
Kenya Medical Research Institute
(Webpage) Welcome to PvERS: The Pharmacovigilance Electronic Reporting System (KEN-6) (Current as of August 25, 2025)
Pharmacy and Poisons Board
Forms
(Form) Application Form for Institutional Ethics Review Committee Accreditation/Renewal of Accreditation (KEN-10) (Date Unavailable)
National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation
(Form) Application Form for Registration of a Research Organization (KEN-11) (Date Unavailable)
National Commission for Science, Technology, and Innovation
(Form) Reporting Tool for Research Institutions and Universities in Kenya (KEN-36) (April 2021)
National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Liberia
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
English
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
Yes
Clinical trial registration required
Yes
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
Unspecified
Age of minors
Under 18
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority

As per the LMHRA-Act, the LibCTReg, and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial approvals, oversight, and inspections. According to the LMHRA-Act, the LMHRA operates as an autonomous government agency that reports to the President of the Republic of Liberia. In addition to its role in authorizing clinical trials, the LMHRA-Act indicates that the LMHRA’s responsibilities also include drug and health care product registration, inspections, import/export control, licensing, quality control, advertising and promotion, and pharmacovigilance and post-marketing surveillance.

Per LBR-30, the Clinical Trials Unit within LMHRA’s Pharmacovigilance & Clinical Trials Department is responsible for coordinating all aspects of clinical trials in Liberia including:

Receiving and assessing all clinical trial applications submitted to the LMHRA
Conducting good clinical practice (GCP) inspections of trial sites and GCP training for inspectors and the study team to ensure compliance that is in line with LMHRA regulatory requirements and international best practices
Reviewing all reports from clinical trial sites and advising management on appropriate regulatory actions
Investigating the conduct of clinical trials
Suspending or stopping clinical trials (depending on the magnitude of the offense)
Serving as secretariat for the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) on clinical trials
Reviewing importation permits for investigational products (IPs) that are required for the conduct of clinical trials
Conducting pre-submission meetings to discuss issues related to application processes
Reviewing all reports (safety reports, quarterly reports, Serious Adverse Events (SAE) reports and final or close-out reports) from clinical trial studies conducted
Per the LibCTReg, the LMHRA can establish advisory committees for the review of clinical trial applications and for post-approval safety and compliance issues, if needed, and especially in the event of new/emerging technologies. According to LBR-29, the LMHRA has established an SAC to provide technical support to review clinical trial applications.

Other Considerations

Please note: Liberia is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (LBR-3), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see LBR-17.

Contact Information

Per LBR-19, the LMHRA contact information is as follows:

Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA)
2nd & 3rd Floors Clay Building
Sekou Toure Avenue
Mamba Point
Monrovia, Liberia
Phone: (+231) 777-140-555 or (+231) 888-140-555
Email: info@lmhra.gov.lr

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the LMHRA-Act, the LibCTReg, and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) is responsible for reviewing, evaluating, and approving applications for clinical trials using registered or unregistered investigational products (IPs). According to the G-LibClinTrial, proposed clinical trials of registered medicines may include changes to indications, new methods of administration, or new combinations, etc. The G-LibClinTrial specifies that the scope of the LMHRA’s assessment includes all clinical trials (Phases I-IV). In addition, per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) and LMHRA reviews may be conducted in parallel. However, the G-LibClinTrial and the G-NREB specify that the LMHRA will only issue final approval once NREB (ethics committee (EC)) approval is obtained.

Clinical Trial Review Process

According to LBR-30, the LMHRA’s Clinical Trials Unit within the Pharmacovigilance & Clinical Trials Department is responsible for coordinating all clinical trial activities. According to LBR-29, the LMHRA has established a Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) to review clinical trial applications.

Per the G-LibClinTrial, the LMHRA will only process an application upon receipt of a completed application and the prescribed fees. Upon receipt, the LMHRA screens the clinical trial application package for completeness and must inform the applicant in writing about the validity of the application or the formal grounds for non-acceptance of the application. After validating the application package is complete, the LMHRA conducts a scientific assessment of the application.

During the clinical trial scientific assessment process, the LibCTReg and G-LibClinTrial also explain that relevant clinical trial decisions, reports, or information from other national regulatory authorities or regional and international bodies can be recognized or used by the LMHRA. The LibCTReg further specifies that the scope/extent of utilization of relevant clinical trial decisions, reports, or information from other national regulatory authorities or regional and international bodies will be at the sole discretion of the LMHRA. In such instances, business and company secrets must remain confidential.

The LibCTReg also states that the LMHRA must inform the NREB if it is in possession of information bearing on other clinical trials which is of significance to the board's assessment of the clinical trial on which it is to issue an expert opinion; this applies especially to information on aborted or otherwise prematurely discontinued investigations. In such instances, business and company secrets must remain confidential. Also, the LMHRA must ensure that the list of approved and rejected clinical trial applications as well as summary of evaluation reports and status of approved clinical trials are publicly available and periodically updated.

Per G-LibClinTrial, all applications must be evaluated with the same set of criteria based on up-to-date scientific knowledge and ethics standards, regardless of the applicant. The LMHRA may also request additional documents or changes through a query letter. Once a query has been raised and issued to the applicant, the process stops when the LMHRA receives a written response to the query. If the LMHRA requires changes to the application, the applicant must modify the application within an established timeline, or it will be rejected.

As indicated in the G-LibClinTrial, the LMHRA must issue a clinical trial certificate indicating the LMHRA clinical trial number to the applicant upon application approval. The clinical trial certificate may contain conditions required by the LMHRA with respect to the conduct or reporting of the trial. If the application is rejected, the applicant can submit a written appeal to the LMHRA’s Managing Director. Moreover, the information provided in a clinical trial application must not be disclosed by the LMHRA to a third party except with the written consent of the applicant or in accordance with the directive of the LMHRA Board of Directors.

Per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, under certain circumstances, the LMHRA may accept an expedited application and review process for clinical trials (e.g., epidemics or other urgent public health interests requiring fast use of new medicines or health products and/or fast gathering of health product information). The LibCTReg also notes that in the case of emergency situations, the LMHRA may also make exemptions to the documentation requirements for the submission of clinical trial applications. Refer to 2.3 of the G-LibClinTrial for additional information on how to submit an expedited clinical trial application package. In the case of trials involving human participants, per the G-LibClinTrial, the applicant must provide proof of current, relevant, and appropriate study insurance for all participants or professional indemnity insurance for investigators as part of the application submission package to be sent to the LMHRA.

As delineated in the LibCTReg, any amendments to approved clinical trial documentation, trial arrangements, and the IPs referenced in the application must be classified and processed as determined by the LMHRA in the corresponding guidelines. The G-LibClinTrial explains that depending on the nature of the change, trial amendments are regarded as substantial or non-substantial/minor amendments. Amendments to a clinical trial are regarded as “substantial” when they are likely to have significant impact on the safety or physical or mental integrity of the trial participants and/or the scientific value of the trial. Any substantial amendments to the clinical trial protocol, clinical trial arrangements, or the IP or related product deemed to be an amendment must be approved by the LMHRA and the NREB before such amendments are carried out. Written NREB approval is also required before the LMHRA can reach a decision on an amendment. The LMHRA should respond within 20 calendar days upon receipt of the NREB’s written decision. The LMRHA may reject or accept the changes, or recommend a revision of the sponsor’s classification.

Per the G-LibClinTrial, non-substantial/minor amendments, by comparison, can be implemented immediately by the sponsor and should always be documented and notified to the LMHRA and the NREB. However, in order to allow the LMHRA to exercise its clinical trial oversight function, the sponsor should ensure that the LMRHA is aware of a non-substantial amendment(s) as soon as possible. For example, progress reports including safety data as well as annual updates of the investigator's brochure (IB) are not considered amendments per se, and therefore, do not have to be notified as substantial amendments to the LMHRA. However, the sponsor has to verify whether the data presented requires a change to the documentation submitted with the request for clinical trial authorization. If this amendment is substantial, the rules for notification of substantial amendments apply to these changes. See the G-LibClinTrial for additional amendment requirements. See the Submission Process section for amendment submission requirements.

Per the LibCTReg, the LMHRA’s written approval of a clinical trial with IPs involving human participants is based on the conclusion that the anticipated therapeutic and public benefits justify the risk and may be continued only if compliance with this requirement is permanently monitored. An LMHRA authorization may only be refused if:

The documents submitted are incomplete up to the expiration of an appropriate deadline given to the applicant for their supplementation
The documents submitted, especially the data on the IP(s) and the trial protocol including the investigator's brochure (IB), do not comply with the current state of scientific knowledge, and especially, the clinical trial is unsuitable for providing proof of IP(s) safety or efficacy, or
In the case of trials involving human participants, the documentation requirements (see Section 1 (4) of LibCTReg), particularly insurance coverage for trial participants, are not fulfilled
The LMHRA is in possession of findings which indicate that the testing facility is not suitable to conduct the clinical trial
The LMHRA is of the opinion that the number of clinical trial participants to be recruited in the trial is not scientifically justified, or
The requirements provided for in the general conditions and special preconditions for conducting a clinical trial (see Chapter II (Sections 1-2) of LibCTReg) are no longer fulfilled
The LibCTReg indicates that in a clinical trial of an IP consisting of a genetically modified organism, consisting of a combination of genetically modified organisms, or containing such organisms, unjustifiable harmful effects on the health of third persons and the environment are not to be expected when the trial is conducted according to the state of scientific knowledge in relation to the trial’s purpose.

(See the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for detailed submission requirements and the Timeline of Review section for additional LMHRA timeline information.)

The LibCTReg further explains that a clinical trial authorization must be suspended by the LMHRA for a limited period of time if at least one (1) of the following is true:

It becomes known that one (1) of the grounds for refusal previously indicated existed at the time the trial authorization was issued (see also Chapter II (Section 5 (3)) of LibCTReg)
The conditions surrounding the clinical trial do not correspond to the information contained in the authorization application
The facts presented give reason to doubt the safety or the scientific basis of the clinical trial
Per the LibCTReg, the LMHRA must withdraw a clinical trial authorization when scientific justification for resuming the trial is not provided to address the reasons previously indicated for suspension. The LMHRA must also immediately inform the NREB through a written communication stating the grounds for its action. Before a decision is taken, the applicant must be allowed a deadline of 10 working days to submit a statement, unless the LMHRA orders the immediate interruption of the clinical trial. The lodging of an objection and an action to rescind the withdrawal or the order to suspend the authorization should not have a suspensive effect. If the authorization to conduct a clinical trial is withdrawn or suspended, the clinical trial may not be continued. Also, if the LMHRA, in the context of its activities, becomes aware of facts which justify the assumption that one (1) or more of the investigators or the sponsor or the sponsor’s representative no longer fulfills their obligations with regard to the proper conduct of the clinical trial, the LMHRA must immediately inform this individual(s) and must order remedial measures to be taken by the individual(s).

Pursuant to Part VIII of the LMHRA-Act, the LibCTReg states that any person(s), institution(s), corporate entity(ies), their designees, or legal representatives who violates the clinical trial authorization procedures, the serious adverse event notification requirements, and/or the suspension/withdrawal provisions delineated in the LibCTReg will be liable to pay administrative fines. See the LibCTReg for details.

Inspection

As stated in the LibCTReg, the LMHRA should inspect a clinical trial to ensure that the general public is adequately protected against the adverse event risks related to a clinical trial with IP(s); and, to confirm that the PI and the sponsor, including the sponsor’s representatives, are strictly adhering to the specific and general conditions to which the trial was authorized. The G-LibClinTrial also indicates that the LMHRA may inspect clinical trial sites and/or the sponsor's/contract research organization (CRO)’s premises and/or the manufacturer’s premises to ensure that the clinical trials comply with good clinical practice (GCP) provisions before, during, or after the trial is conducted.

Per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, NREB representatives may accompany the LMHRA during clinical trial site inspections, or, per the LibCTReg, they may choose to do the inspections independently. The G-LibClinTrial also notes that the LMHRA may include other relevant regulatory authorities in the inspection. The PI and/or the sponsor/CRO and/or the manufacturer must be notified in writing of the inspection unless the LMHRA has reasonable cause to believe that the approved protocol is being violated. In this case, an unannounced inspection may be conducted. Following these inspections, the LMHRA must prepare an inspection report, and the report will be made available to the PI and/or sponsor while safeguarding the confidential aspects. The report may also be made available to the NREB and other regulatory authorities upon their request.

Additionally, the LibCTReg specifies that the LMHRA may also:

Request additional information
Inspect any resources that are deemed by the LMHRA to be related to the clinical trial and that may be located at the trial site, the sponsor´s and/or CRO’s facilities, or other establishments deemed appropriate by the LMHRA
Suspend or stop a clinical
Withdraw the authorization to conduct a clinical trial, if the LMHRA is of the opinion that the safety of the trial participants may be compromised, that the scientific reasons for conducting the trial have changed, or if the integrity of the data is compromised
Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority

The LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial require proof of payment of the clinical trial application fee in the application dossier. Per LibCTReg and LBR-39, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) charges a non-refundable fee to submit a clinical trial application for authorization. As delineated below, authorization fees vary depending on the phase and institution conducting the study:

Industry Funded (Phase I): $25,000 USD
Industry Funded (Phase II): $20,000 USD
Industry Funded (Phase III): $15,000 USD
Clinical Research Organization (CRO) Funded Phase I: $10,000 USD
CRO Funded Phase II: $8,000 USD
CRO Funded Phase III: $6,000 USD
Investigator/Local Phases III & IV: $2,500 USD
Academic Research Trial (Individual): $2,000 USD
Amendment (Substantial) to Clinical Trial Protocol: $1,000 USD
Payment Instructions

No information is available regarding payment instructions.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Overview

Per the G-ACRE-IRB and the G-NREB, all research involving human participants should be reviewed by an ethics committee (EC). According to the NatResHlthPlcy, Liberia has two (2) ethics committees (ECs): the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) and the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB) (formerly known as the University of Liberia-Pacific Institute for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (UL-PIRE-IRB)).

National Research Ethics Board of Liberia

As explained in the G-NREB, the NREB is an advisory institution that reports to the Ministry of Health (MoH), and its members are appointed by the Minister of Health. According to LBR-38, only the NREB has the sole responsibility to review all clinical trial protocols. The G-NREB states that the board ensures all research related protocols within and outside of Liberia are in compliance with internationally recognized ethical standards (including the Belmont Report (LBR-11), the Declaration of Helsinki (LBR-27), the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8), and the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS’) International Ethical Guidelines for Health-related Research Involving Humans (LBR-2)), as well as Liberia’s applicable regulations and guidelines. In addition, per the G-NREB and LBR-12, the NREB is responsible for reviewing research proposals involving human participants to assess their compliance with ethical principles, regulatory requirements, and international guidelines, and for approving research protocols that meet ethical standards and providing recommendations for addressing any ethical concerns.

Per the NatResHlthPlcy the G-NREB, and LBR-12, the NREB is also responsible for the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Ensuring that researchers obtain informed consent from participants and protect their rights, privacy, and confidentiality
Evaluating the potential risks and benefits of research projects and ensure that they are justified and minimized
Developing and disseminating policies, guidelines, and standards for ethical conduct in research
Providing guidance and support to researchers, research institutions, and ECs on ethical issues related to research involving human participants
Fostering awareness and understanding of ethical principles and regulatory requirements among stakeholders in the research community
Conducting training programs, workshops, and seminars to educate researchers, EC members, and other stakeholders on ethical principles and best practices in research ethics
Building the capacity of research institutions and ECs to effectively review and oversee research involving human participants
Promoting a culture of ethical conduct and responsible research practices within the research community
Monitoring compliance with approved research protocols and ethical standards throughout the duration of research projects
Conducting periodic reviews or audits of research activities to ensure adherence to ethical principles and regulatory requirements
Investigating and addressing any allegations of research misconduct or breaches of ethical standards
Establishing guidelines for the review of research for health protocols for use by other review boards
Giving advice on ethical research issues to the MoH and related government ministries and agencies
Engaging with the public, policymakers, and other stakeholders to raise awareness of ethical issues in research and foster dialogue on ethical considerations
Advocating for the protection of research participants’ rights and the promotion of ethical conduct in research at the national and international levels
Collaborating with relevant government agencies, institutions, and organizations to advance the ethical governance of research
Establishing and maintaining a repository of all protocols reviewed in the country along with finished research/study reports
Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

As noted in the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB is mandated by the Board of Directors of the ACRE Africa Center. According to LBR-28, the ACRE IRB has the expertise to review clinical research, and some members of the ACRE IRB also serve on the NREB and provide expertise in the review of clinical trial protocols. However, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the NREB and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical research protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.

Ethics Committee Composition

National Research Ethics Board of Liberia

According to the G-NREB, the NREB is composed of 21 members who jointly represent a diverse community with a range of expertise. The G-NREB notes that the majority of the board members are clinicians, scientists, and national subject matter experts. Per LBR-18, the NREB board typically consists of experts in various fields related to research ethics, such as medicine, public health, social sciences, ethics, law, and community representatives. Board members may include researchers, ethicists, healthcare professionals, legal experts, and representatives from government agencies and civil society organizations. LBR-38 further specifies that the NREB membership includes, but is not limited to, a sociologist, an infectious disease scientist, a biologist, a lawyer, a pharmacist, an epidemiologist, a statistician, a bioethicist, a mental health specialist, a health system strengthening specialist, a religious elder, community elders, surgeons, clinicians, and public health specialists.

In addition, per LBR-18, although the NREB organization structure may vary based on its specific mandate, size, and operational requirements, the board typically consists of a chairperson/executive director, a secretariat or administrative staff, ethics review committees/panels, and advisory groups that may provide specialized expertise or support for specific activities or initiatives.

Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

As specified in the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB members (full, regular, and ad-hoc) must be recommended by the ACRE IRB Chair and appointed by the ACRE Board of Directors. The ACRE IRB must be comprised of 12 members with the qualifications and experience, individually and collectively, to review and evaluate the scientific, medical, and ethical aspects of research protocol submissions. The membership must include both scientists and non-scientists from diverse backgrounds to undertake an impartial and adequate review of research proposals. The ACRE IRB membership must include the following:

Scientists (including, but not limited to, professionals in natural science, social science, and behavioral science)
Non-scientists (health practitioners, legal experts representing the community, and civil society)
In addition, the ACRE IRB must ensure social inclusivity and gender sensitivity in its membership and recruitment of ad-hoc reviewers. There must be adequate representation by age, gender, community, etc., on the board to safeguard the interests and welfare of all segments of society. ACRE IRB members must be drawn from both public and private institutions within the country.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

National Research Ethics Board of Liberia

Pursuant to the G-NREB, the NREB follows standard operating procedures (SOPs) as well as relevant ethical guidelines and regulations to ensure compliance with research ethics principles and to uphold societal interests. The NREB may seek subject matter expert opinions regarding specific research protocols and/or issues, as long as the experts have no conflict of interest, including participation in the research, financial interest in the outcome, and/or involvement in competing research, among other reasons. NREB members should meet bi-monthly for regular meetings and adhere to the board’s threshold requirement to review a minimum of three (3) complete applications at each meeting. When applicable, the NREB director may also convene ad-hoc meetings. All complete applications submitted by the deadline must be reviewed at the next regularly scheduled meeting if the number of applications meet the threshold. Members are encouraged to attend all meetings and the quorum required for voting is two-thirds of the NREB membership. Members who cannot attend a meeting due to unforeseen reasons must inform the NREB director two (2) weeks prior to the scheduled meeting. If unable to attend, members must also advise the NREB director regarding their views or concerns on specific agenda items one (1) week prior to a scheduled meeting. Meeting agendas and research protocols should be distributed to members no later than three (3) weeks before a regular meeting. Refer to the G-NREB and LBR-12 for detailed committee requirements.

Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

As delineated in the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB Chair must be the head and chief spokesperson of the board and must conduct meetings in accordance with the policies, regulations, and timetable approved by the board. ACRE IRB members must be appointed initially for a term of three (3) years, which must be renewable and is subject to the ACRE IRB Board of Directors’ decision. To maintain continuity in ACRE IRB operations, at least one-third of the membership must be retained at any given time. The outgoing Chair must be an ex-officio member of the incoming ACRE IRB. ACRE IRB members and consultant reviewers must be provided with all relevant SOPs by the Secretariat to guide in the review process of all submitted protocols. ACRE IRB members are required to review, discuss, and consider protocols submitted to the board for evaluation to safeguard the rights, safety, and well-being of study participants; review progress reports and monitor ongoing research studies appropriately; evaluate final reports and outcomes; maintain absolute confidentiality in all document deliberations at board meetings; state conflicts of interest, where applicable; and participate during deliberations. Members with a conflict of interest will recuse themselves from the review of submissions with which they have a conflict, except to answer specific questions posed by the board. Additionally, per LBR-28, ACRE IRB reviews are conducted virtually via the Zoom platform.

The ACRE IRB must convene a meeting every month or when deemed necessary. The Chair, or a delegated board member, must call the meeting to order, provided there is a quorum. If there is no quorum, the meeting must be rescheduled. A quorum must be greater than 50% of the voting board members at any given event. A quorum must consist of regular and/or alternate board members (persons formally selected by the board to substitute for regular members who are unavailable ), and it must include at least one (1) member whose primary background is science related, and one (1) member whose primary background is not science related. Special/independent consultants cannot be used to establish a quorum. Members who are recused from the review of a protocol cannot be used to establish a quorum. A simple majority vote of ACRE IRB members in attendance is required for a protocol to be approved.

The ACRE IRB Chair may invite individuals with competence in special areas to assist in the review of issues that require expertise beyond or in addition to that available on the board. These individuals will be required to sign a confidentiality agreement before they review a protocol or attend a board protocol discussion, however, they are not permitted to vote. The consultant will provide the Chair with a written report to be shared with all reviewers summarizing relevant information.

Refer to the G-ACRE-IRB for detailed information on ACRE IRB administrative processes.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Overview

According to the G-ACRE-IRB and the G-NREB, the primary scope of information assessed by ethics committees (ECs) in Liberia relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial. According to the NatResHlthPlcy, Liberia has two (2) ECs: the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) and the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB) (formerly the University of Liberia-Pacific Institute for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (UL-PIRE-IRB)).

The G-ACRE-IRB and the G-NREB also state that the ECs are responsible for ensuring independent, timely, and competent reviews of all ethical aspects of the clinical trial protocol. The ECs must also act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved by evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants, and they must verify the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards. As per the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB must pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable, including children.

See the G-ACRE-IRB and the G-NREB for detailed ethical review guidelines.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

As per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) and the NREB must approve a clinical trial application prior to the sponsor or the representative initiating the clinical trial. Per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the NREB and LMHRA reviews may be conducted in parallel. However, the G-LibClinTrial and the G-NREB specify that the LMHRA will only issue final approval once NREB approval is obtained. In addition, per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, any substantial amendment to the approved clinical trial research protocol must be approved by the LMHRA and the NREB before such amendments are carried out.

Additionally, per the LibCTReg, the LMHRA must inform the NREB if it is in possession of information bearing on other clinical trials which is of significance to the board's assessment of the clinical trial on which it is to issue an expert opinion; this applies especially to information on aborted or otherwise prematurely discontinued investigations. In such instances, business and company secrets must remain confidential.

National Research Ethics Board of Liberia

Per the G-LibClinTrial and the G-NREB, ethical clearance by the NREB is required as part of the LMHRA clinical trial approval process. As per the G-NREB, a protocol will be reviewed if the number of submitted protocols meets the board’s threshold requirement to review a minimum of three (3) complete applications at each meeting.

As delineated in the LibCTReg, the NREB provides its opinion on the application for a clinical trial in line with its written standard operating procedures (SOPs). According to LBR-20, upon receiving the research proposals, the NREB conducts a preliminary screening to ensure that all required documents and information are included and that the proposals meet the submission requirements. Incomplete or insufficient proposals may be returned to researchers with instructions for revisions or additional information. An ethics review committee/panel composed of experts in relevant fields, such as medicine, public health, ethics, law, and community representatives is then assigned by the NREB, and the committee members review the proposals independently or collectively, depending on the complexity of the research and the availability of resources. The ethics review committee/panel thoroughly evaluates each research proposal based on established ethical review criteria.

Per LBR-31, the NREB follows established ethical review criteria to evaluate research proposals to help ensure that research studies adhere to ethical principles and protect the rights, welfare, and dignity of research participants. The ethical criteria delineated in LBR-31 include informed consent, beneficence, justice, privacy and confidentiality, respect for participants’ rights and dignity, scientific validity and integrity, and compliance with regulatory requirements. See LBR-31 for details.

Per LBR-20, the committee members also assess the ethical implications of the proposed research, including the risks and benefits to participants, the adequacy of the informed consent process, the protection of vulnerable populations, and the equitable distribution of research burdens and benefits. The review process may involve discussions, debates, and deliberations among committee members to reach consensus on the ethical acceptability of the research proposals. See also LBR-23 for additional EC review guidelines.

LBR-20 further explains that the NREB communicates the outcomes of the ethical review process to researchers, including decisions on approval, conditional approval pending revisions, or rejection. Researchers receive feedback and recommendations from the EC to address any ethical concerns raised during the review process and may be required to make revisions to their proposals, provide additional information, or address specific ethical issues before final approval is granted. The LibCTReg also notes that a written permission from the NREB may only be refused if the documents submitted are incomplete up to the expiration of an appropriate deadline given to the applicant for their supplementation; the documents submitted, including the trial protocol, the investigator’s brochure, the modalities for selecting trial participants, and informed consent/assent, do not correspond to the current state of scientific knowledge, and especially, the clinical trial is unsuitable for providing IP(s) proof of safety or efficacy, or; the applicable requirements specified in the general conditions for conducting clinical trials (see Chapter II (Section 1) of LibCTReg) are not fulfilled.

Per the G-NREB, a principal investigator (PI) will be contacted by written communication (letter or email) if the NREB determines that additional materials are required to complete its review. PIs may also be asked to be available for presentations and/or contacted during the meetings. The G-NREB also explains that the NREB should notify PIs in writing of its decision within two (2) weeks following a board meeting, where applicable, following a complete review of the protocols. The NREB will also communicate its decisions to the NREB Secretariat. An approval expiration date is not specified. Pursuant to the G-NREB, PIs may also re-submit previously considered protocols, which will require a full NREB review. Per LBR-20, once all the ethical requirements have been met, the NREB grants final approval for the research proposals to proceed.

As indicated in the G-NREB, for continuing review submissions, PIs must submit review reports to the NREB Secretariat at least eight (8) weeks prior to the approved protocol’s expiration. If the NREB has not reviewed and approved a study’s request by the current expiration date, study activities should cease until the board determines whether continuing the research is in the best interest of all previously enrolled participants. The NREB will also review continuing review submissions prior to the expected expiration date of NREB approval for requests to extend the ethical approval to continue implementation of the research project. See LBR-6 for the NREB Continuing Review Form. See the Progress Reporting section for additional information on continuing review.

Additionally, per LibCTReg, the NREB’s written permission must be withdrawn if the NREB subsequently becomes aware that grounds for a refusal as referred to in the clinical trial authorization procedures (see Chapter II (Section 5 (1)) of LibCTReg) existed at the time the authorization was issued. The authorization must be withdrawn if the NREB becomes aware of the fact that subsequently at least one (1) of the following is true:

Requirements regarding the suitability of the investigator, the investigator’s deputy, or the trial site are no longer fulfilled
Trial participants are no longer properly insured or the prerequisites for an exception to the insurance obligation no longer exist
Modalities for selecting trial participants no longer correspond to the current state of medical knowledge and, especially, the clinical trial is unsuitable for providing proof of the IP(s) safety or efficacy
Prerequisites for the inclusion of persons pursuant to the general conditions and special preconditions for conducting a clinical trial (see Chapter II (Sections 1-2) of LibCTReg) are no longer fulfilled. The NREB shall inform the LMHRA through a written communication
For protocol amendments, per the G-NREB, the NREB must review and approve any protocol amendments prior to implementation. The NREB secretariat must first consult with the NREB Chair to determine the type of review required (full board review or expedited due to risk). Protocols that pose no or minimal risk to participants, have no formal informed consent process, or are subject to NREB continuing review, may be considered exempt and may qualify for expedited review. Refer to the G-NREB for detailed information on the decision types and various review processes the NREB uses to consider protocol submissions.

Additionally, the G-NREB explains that as a condition of research protocol approval, the NREB requires the PI to provide regular updates to the Secretariat from the date of approval. LBR-20 also notes that researchers are required to report any significant deviations from the approved protocols or ethical concerns that arise during the course of the research to the NREB for review and guidance. The NREB may also provide ongoing monitoring and oversight to ensure continued compliance with ethical standards and regulatory requirements. The G-NREB specifies that the NREB must conduct site visits at appropriate intervals. In certain cases, the site visits may be unannounced to ensure the integrity of the study.

Reviews During Public Health Emergencies

As delineated in the G-CTEmergncy, in the event a public health emergency is declared in Liberia or a neighboring country by the World Health Organization (WHO), the Ministry of Health (MoH), or the National Public Health Institute of Liberia (NPHIL), the NREB will expedite the initiation of research and many processes (i.e., drafting documents, translations, and obtaining approvals) will occur in parallel, rather than sequentially, as is typical during non-emergency situations.

Per the G-CTEmergncy, in addition to the NREB review form (if applicable), the following checklist will be included to streamline fast-tracking of epidemic-related research:

Identify the research as epidemic or outbreak-related to facilitate fast-tracking
Specify whether prior research data on the disease exists, referencing relevant local and international studies
Ensure the inclusion of at least one (1) (preferably two (2)) PIs or co-PIs from the country where the research and review take place
Provide qualifications of key investigators, including details of their previous experience with outbreak-relevant research
Indicate if the protocol is part of a multicenter trial. If so, describe the status of ethics approval for the master protocol or the ethics approval from the sponsoring country
The G-CTEmergncy indicates that the NREB will also use the following guidelines to ensure compliance during health emergencies:

Establish surge capacity for reviews and systems for virtual discussions (via platforms like Zoom)
Identify core members who will handle the majority of the review burden, providing specialized training in outbreak-related research review to ensure high standards without compromising ethical considerations. Additional members can be called upon as demand increases
The Director will alert members and determine whether they are available for emergency review
Identify subject experts (technical and ethical) within the country and abroad who are willing to serve as ad hoc or co-opted members during outbreaks, anticipating the need to review multiple studies in a short time
Establish a quorum consisting of one-third of NREB members, including pre-identified subject matter experts. If a pre-identified member submits their review but cannot attend the meeting, the member will still count towards the quorum
The G-CTEmergncy further states that revised SOPs will be circulated to all review committee members. Meetings may be virtual or electronic to reduce health risks during highly infectious outbreaks (e.g., COVID-19, Ebola). Protocols should be submitted electronically for efficiency, with hard copies to follow if mandatory. PIs must inform the NREB as early as possible about their intent to submit a high-level overview of their research (e.g., trial of a new medicine or vaccine, observational study, or survey) to prepare the committee for forthcoming protocols. Face-to-face meetings with PIs are not mandatory and may be conducted electronically or virtually if necessary. Also, protocols will be sent to reviewers within 48 hours of submission. Reviewers should complete their reviews within five (5) days during an outbreak. The PI should receive consolidated reviews with suggestions or approval within 10 working days, and should respond to the review within 48 hours. The director of the NREB secretariat will be the primary contact for communication with PIs, and all communications will be documented and archived for future reference.

Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

Per G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB’s purpose is to review and certify the ethical acceptability of all research involving human participants conducted in Liberia. However, per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the NREB and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.

Per G-ACRE-IRB, all studies submitted to the ACRE must be approved by the ACRE IRB. This includes all studies conducted by ACRE investigators as well as all research conducted by outside investigators or students and faculty of universities in Liberia. The G-ACRE-IRB is intended to ensure quality and consistency in the ACRE IRB’s review of social, behavioral, clinical, and biomedical research protocols that comply with the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS’) International Ethical Guidelines for Health-related Research Involving Humans (LBR-2) and the national ethical guidelines for research on human participants.

According to G-ACRE-IRB, on receipt of a proposal for review, the ACRE IRB Secretariat will preliminarily assess the completeness of the submission. If the submission is incomplete, the Secretariat will inform the PI accordingly and request the additional materials. Once the submission is deemed complete, the Secretariat will notify the PI and distribute the materials to the assigned ACRE IRB members. Exempt studies will be reviewed by all board members; expedited studies will be reviewed by all board members; full review studies will be sent to the entire ACRE IRB membership for review. An expedited study is defined as one which does not require review by a convened ACRE IRB quorum because it has been determined that participants are subject to low risk. Additional information about the various review types can be found in the G-ACRE-IRB. The PI must check the level at which the protocol will be reviewed and confirm the required documents before submitting it for review. Please refer to the G-ACRE-IRB for additional information on the administrative processes relating to proposal submission.

As specified in the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB approval will commence on the day the study is approved and will expire within a defined time period based on the risk assessment and regulations. If specific conditions are stipulated in the approval letter, those conditions must be met by the designated date or approval may be withdrawn.

The G-ACRE-IRB also states that the ACRE IRB must review and approve any protocol amendments prior to those changes being implemented. The protocol submission is reviewed either via expedited procedures (for minor changes) or via full ACRE IRB review (for all other changes). The criteria for approval are the same as for initial review. In addition, the ACRE IRB has a continuing responsibility to monitor the approved trial(s) to ensure ethical compliance throughout the study duration. A continuing review is conducted to review progress of an ongoing study, and not just changes made in the study, in order to ensure continued protection of the rights and welfare of research participants. Refer to the G-ACRE-IRB for protocol amendment and continuing review documentation submission and procedural requirements.

Additionally, per the G-ACRE-IRB, a protocol may be selected to undergo post-approval monitoring due to reported complaints and/or requests by the convened EC. Other reasons for post-approval monitoring may include:

From continuing review or reports from other sources, it is revealed that material changes may have occurred without ACRE IRB approval
Where an investigator conducting a project has previous records of noncompliance
Projects involving vulnerable populations that raise cause for concern
Complex projects involving unusual levels or types of risks to participants
Upon request by the investigator
In response to inquiries from external regulatory agencies
The G-ACRE-IRB further notes that if the monitoring reveals serious or continuing noncompliance, the EC Secretariat or EC designee will compile the information regarding the allegation, complaint, or report and submit the information to the EC for further review and processing as needed. See the G-ACRE-IRB for additional information on monitoring procedures, reporting of monitoring results, and noncompliance.

As described in the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB is also authorized to suspend or terminate an approved research study for a variety of reasons, including but not limited to:

Failure to obtain appropriate consent or keep appropriate study-related paperwork
Conduct of research activities without prior ACRE IRB approval
Serious adverse event(s)
Detrimental change in the risk-benefit ratio of the study
Failure of investigators to complete required training
The convened board is specifically authorized to suspend or terminate approval of research protocols that are not being conducted in accordance with the ACRE IRB’s requirements or that has been associated with serious harm to the participants. The ACRE IRB Chair, or the designee, is authorized to suspend research protocols in emergency situations, such as when the rights, safety, or welfare of research participants are at immediate risk. Refer to the G-ACRE-IRB for detailed information on the board’s process for study suspension/termination, notification of the investigator, the consequences of study suspension/termination, and ACRE IRB requirements for permitting study reinstatement.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia

As described in the G-NREB, the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) must charge a minimal fee for the review of each submission type. Submissions include research protocols, re-submissions, amendments, and continuing reviews. The fee structure is based on the following application types: research protocol, behavioral research, investigational product (IP) (clinical trial), non-clinical trial, or waiver/exemption. Fees specifically associated with conducting a clinical trial involving IPs is based on a project’s scope, duration, sample size, and complexity as well as the types and quantities of IPs, among other criteria. The fees delineated in the G-NREB are as follows:

Clinical trial: $7,000 USD
Re-submission: $1,500 USD
Continuing Review: $1,500 USD
Amendment: $1,500 USD
Payment Instructions

No information is available regarding payment instructions for the NREB.

Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

As per the G-ACRE-IRB, the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB) fees for protocol review other than clinical trials are as follows:

Health, Behavioral and Education Research: $500 USD
Re-Submission: $500 USD
Continuing Review: $500 USD
Amendment: $250 USD
Foreign Student: $300 USD
Liberian Student: $100 USD
The fee for non-sponsored research conducted by individual investigators is 50 percent of the sponsored research fee.

Payment Instructions

No information is available regarding payment instructions for the ACRE IRB.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Overview

There are no applicable regulations or guidance regarding the authorization of ethics committees (ECs) in Liberia. However, per G-NREB, the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) is responsible for maintaining a registry of health research ECs and mitigating conflicts among ECs, researchers, and research entities.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

No information is available on registration, auditing, and accreditation requirements.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the sponsor, the legal representative, the principal investigator (PI), or the sponsor-investigator is responsible for submitting a clinical trial application to the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) and obtain written permission from the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB). However, per the G-NREB, the PI must obtain ethics committee (EC) approval. The LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial state that the NREB and LMHRA reviews may be conducted in parallel. Per the G-LibClinTrial and the G-NREB, the LMHRA will only issue final approval once NREB approval is obtained.

Regulatory Submission

As indicated in the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the sponsor or the representative should submit the application form and associated documents along with the prescribed fee. Also, per the G-LibClinTrial, four (4) sets of the application should be submitted both electronically and as printed copies to the LMHRA. The clinical trial application and any accompanying material must be submitted in English. If the documents are written in another language, a certified translation is required. Per LBR-29, the sponsor's representative must also submit a power of attorney attesting that the representative is a duly appointed agent.

Additionally, per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, any substantial amendment to the approved clinical trial documentation, trial arrangements, and the investigational product must be submitted by the applicant to the LMHRA and the NREB together with the prescribed fee for the evaluation and authorization related to such amendment. Per the G-LibClinTrial, the submitted amendment(s) must be indicated in a signed cover letter identifying the clinical trial, the sponsor (applicant) and must include the possible consequences for the evaluation of the results. The amendment(s) must also be described in a completed Clinical Trial Amendment form (Annex 2 of the G-LibClinTrial), and the new version of the documents identified should include an updated version number and date. Also, the submitted document should clearly present scientific arguments justifying classification of an amendment to the LMHRA and the NREB, and, where applicable, supporting information must be included with the submission.

Per the G-LibClinTrial, the signed cover letter and clinical trial application dossier should be sent to the following:

The Managing Director
Liberia Medicine and Health products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA)
2nd & 3rd Floors Clay Building
Sekou Toure Avenue
Mamba Point
Monrovia, Liberia

Ethics Review Submission

National Research Ethics Board of Liberia

As delineated in the LibCTReg, application submissions to the NREB must include all of the information and documents as required for the board’s opinion. According to the G-NREB, PIs must submit typed, dated, and signed submissions electronically and by hard copy to the NREB. The documents should be formatted in standard font size 12, double-spaced, with the pages printed on one (1) side only. The NREB requires 15 comb-bound copies of the full research protocol along with the attachments listed in the G-NREB, and where applicable, an email version that includes the protocol title and the PI’s name. In addition, all protocols must be numbered appropriately and separately from all other supporting documentation (e.g., letters, participant information sheets and consent forms, questionnaires, curriculum vitae(s) (CVs), etc.). Supporting documents should also be numbered separately. Refer to LBR-32 for the NREB Research Protocol Template.

In addition to protocol submission requirements, the G-NREB also specifies that the complete application for ethical review and approval of a proposed health research study should be submitted by a PI to the NREB Secretariat. Applicants should submit the application three (3) weeks prior to the next NREB meeting. Applications submitted by a PI and researchers from foreign institutions must also include a local (resident) Liberian researcher on the research team as well as support letters and CV(s). See the G-NREB for detailed application submission requirements.

Per the G-NREB, NREB submissions should be submitted to the following address:

Director
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB)
First Floor West, John F. Kennedy Medical Center
Monrovia, Liberia
Email: nreb.liberia.gov@gmail.com

As delineated in the G-CTEmergncy, during a public health emergency in Liberia or in a neighboring country, the NREB requires protocols to be written in English and include, at a minimum, the proposed study, corresponding ethics approval, consent or assent forms, and data collection tools and forms. In addition, along with the usual documents for review (protocols, CVs, Human Subject Certificates, Good Clinical Practice, etc.), the following must be submitted:

A collaboration letter (in the form of a memorandum of understanding) with sponsor institutions and research funders, including declarations of interest when possible
A monitoring and safety management plan for the project provided by the PI and study sponsor
Data-sharing and material transfer agreements for data and biological materials, especially if samples will be exported out of the country, ensuring compliance with the Laws of Liberia (a draft version may be submitted initially)
Clear procedures for dissemination, publication, co-authorship, co-presentation, and intellectual property rights
Plans to disseminate findings to the affected community, ensuring continued engagement and trust, especially among research participants
Depending on the type of research, a local insurance policy for trials and interventions may be required
Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

As indicated in the G-ACRE-IRB, PIs are required to submit the research protocol as part of an application packet that includes the documentation specified by the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB) submission form (see Article XXV in the G-ACRE-IRB). (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the NREB and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.) According to LBR-28, the ACRE IRB has not reinstated the requirement for PIs to submit eight (8) hard copies of the protocol. Applications should be submitted electronically. See the Submission Content section for additional documentation requirements.

Per the G-ACRE-IRB, all research proposals are to be submitted (either via electronic mail or in person) to:

The IRB Coordinator
Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation (ACRE)
Ground Floor, Graduate School Building
University of Liberia
Capitol Hill
Monrovia, Liberia

Proposals submitted electronically should be sent to jktegli@yahoo.com and ulpireirb@gmail.com.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

As set forth in the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the sponsor, the legal representative, the principal investigator (PI), or the sponsor-investigator is required to obtain clinical trial authorization from the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) and written permission from the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB). However, per the G-NREB, the PI must obtain ethics committee (EC) approval.

As per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the following documentation must be submitted to the LMHRA (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Cover letter (signed, witnessed, and notarized) including list of documents submitted and their version numbers and date
Clinical trial application form including cover page
Clinical trial protocol (see below for detailed protocol requirements)
A list of the planned clinical trial sites and the planned number of study participants to be recruited at the sites located in Liberia
Details of the site(s) where the trial is to be conducted and a duly justified written statement on the suitability of the clinical trial sites adapted to the nature and use of the investigational product (IP) and including a description of the suitability of facilities, equipment, human resources, and description of expertise, issued by the head of the clinic/institution at the trial site or by some other responsible person
Participant information sheet, informed consent form(s) (ICF(s)) or video(s), or assent form(s) in case of minor(s) or persons under legal disability who are to participate in the trial, and informed consent procedure for clinical trials in humans
Product information if the IP is registered (summary of product characteristics, patient information leaflet/package insert and labelling)
Investigator’s Brochure (IB) containing relevant chemical, pharmaceutical, pre-clinical pharmacological and toxicological data, and where applicable, human or animal pharmacological and safety and efficacy clinical data about the IP
If applicable, synopsis of previous trials with the IP(s)
If applicable, electronic copies of key, peer-reviewed publications following the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) recommendations to support the application
Copy or copies of recruitment advertisement(s), if applicable, and questionnaires
Investigational medicinal product (IMP) dossier, if applicable
Product information and certificate of analysis (CoA) for the concomitant and rescue medications
Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) certificate issued from the national regulatory authority of the country where the IP is manufactured, translated into English language
CoA of the IP(s)
Certificate(s) of accreditation for the central laboratories
Workload forms for investigators
Signed declaration by the applicant (includes a commitment to adhere to the ethical principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki (LBR-27) and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8)
Signed declaration by the national PI
Signed curriculum vitae (CV) for all key staff participating in the conduct of the clinical trial (e.g., PI and/or co-investigators, study coordinator, regional and local monitor, contract research affiliate, etc.)
Signed declaration(s) by each investigator(s)
Signed joint financial declaration between the sponsor and the PI
Signed declaration by the sub-investigators and key staff participating in the trial
Signed declaration by the regional clinical trial monitor(s)
Signed declaration by the sponsor/sponsor-investigator
Proof of registration with the Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (PACTR) (LBR-36) or another World Health Organization (WHO) Primary Registry (LBR-35)
Active clinical trial insurance (Phase I, II, and III)
Evidence of Insurance coverage for prospective participants
Proof of sponsor indemnification for investigators and trial site
Good Clinical Practice (GCP) certificates for the investigators
Proof of registration of the key investigators with a professional statutory body, if applicable
Proof of residence in Liberia for the PI
Proof of professional indemnity (i.e., malpractice insurance)
Study budget
In case of parallel submission, proof of submission of the clinical trial application to the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB)
The written permission of the NREB in case of sequential submission, and in case of parallel submission, the updated versions of documents or information as requested by the NREB, for the conduct of the clinical trial, if applicable
Information on the composition of the Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)—including the list, terms of reference, and CVs for its members—justifying their expertise as members of the DSMB
Summary of product characteristics or other professional information for all registered medicines used in the trial, or the international equivalent thereof if the medicines are not registered in Liberia
Registered IPs should include registered indication or registered dosage regimen
Recruitment arrangements
Request for authorization of export of biological samples out of Liberia as well as the respective material transfer agreement, if applicable
Summary of the clinical trial (100-150 words) to be made publicly available on the LMHRA website
Proof of payment of the appropriate application fee
Refer to the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial for detailed application requirements and expedited application documentation requirements.

The LibCTReg also notes that in the case of emergency situations, the LMHRA may also make exemptions to the documentation requirements for the submission of clinical trial applications. Refer to 2.3 of the G-LibClinTrial for additional information on how to submit an expedited clinical trial application package.

Ethics Committee Requirements

National Research Ethics Board of Liberia

As indicated in the G-NREB, for clinical trials and biomedical/epidemiological study submissions, the following documents may be included, but are not limited to:

Full protocol and executive summary (refer to LBR-32 for research protocol template)
Sponsor’s protocol, if applicable (per LBR-32)
Signed agreement between sponsors and PI, where applicable
A statement that the researcher(s) agree to comply with ethical principles set out in relevant guidelines
IB
Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) for shipment of specimen(s)/biological material(s) outside of Liberia, where applicable (See also Specimen Import & Export and Consent for Specimen sections)
Data Sharing Agreement, where applicable
Administrative information on sponsors of the study
Signatory page of key persons from the collaborative institutions involved in the study (i.e., Sponsor Signatory Approval Page duly signed, with date, where applicable)
Written ICF with dates and version number and translations into the local language, where necessary
Written parental consent form for children under 17 years of age (if study involves minors)
Written parental consent form and assent form for children under 18 years of age (15-17 years) (if study involves adolescents)
All forms, documents, and community engagement advertisements to be used in the recruitment of potential participants
All data collection forms to be used in the research including, but not limited to, case report forms, questionnaires, interview schedules, etc., clearly indicated and dated
Referral forms for treatment, where applicable
Study budget
Study timeline
Any other information deemed necessary to facilitate the review process
Current CV(s) of PI and co-investigator(s) if not submitted to the NREB in the preceding 12 months
Profile on previous study (i.e., Phase I & Phase II studies, where applicable)
Investigator Agreement (PI’s responsibility), page duly signed with name and date, and current Certificate of Training in GCP for PI(s)
DSMB membership and charter of work/current member CVs
Insurance coverage for study participants
Scientific review approval
LMHRA approval letter for use of the IPs/devices and clinical trial approval (this should be submitted after the NREB approval)
Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

Per the G-ACRE-IRB, the following documentation must be submitted along with the application for an initial application review of a protocol for clinical research other than a clinical trial (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the NREB and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.):

Cover letter
Protocol summary (Article XXV (Section 25.02) in the G-ACRE-IRB)
Protocol and/or amendments (including data collection instruments, surveys, tests, questionnaires, debriefing information, etc.)
IB, where applicable
Evidence of submission and/or approval from other ECs, where applicable
Proof of research ethics training (i.e., certificate in human subject protection) by research team members
ICFs, where applicable
Questionnaires and other study instruments, where applicable (including interview schedules, recruitment and interview scripts, and recruitment materials (Article XXV (Section 25.02) in the G-ACRE-IRB)
DSMB and Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC) records, if applicable
MTA, if applicable (See also Specimen Import & Export and Consent for Specimen sections)
Status report for ongoing study (applicable for continuing review)
Letter of collaboration or support with collaborating entity/researcher(s), if applicable
Capacity building plan for collaborating agency/researcher, if applicable
Investigator(s) CVs
Social corporate responsibility plan for communities, if applicable
Letter from an appropriate official permitting research activities on their premises, if the research/recruitment will take place in or through schools, businesses, care facilities, or other organizations
Budget
Clinical Protocol

Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority

Per the G-LibClinTrial, the contents and format of the clinical trial protocol should follow the requirements laid down in LBR-8. Accordingly, LBR-8 requires the following protocol contents:

General information (protocol title, identifying number, and date; contact information for the sponsor, medical expert, investigator(s), trial site(s), qualified physician(s), and laboratory and/or institutions involved in the study)
Background information
Objectives and purpose
Trial design
Selection, withdrawal, and treatment of participants
Assessment of efficacy
Assessment of safety
A description of the statistical methods to be used in the trial
Direct access to source data and documents
Quality control and quality assurance
Ethical considerations
Data handling and recordkeeping
Publication policy
In addition, as indicated in the G-LibClinTrial, the protocol should contain a statement that the trial will be conducted in compliance with the protocol, GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirements, and signed and dated by both the sponsor/sponsor’s representative and PI to document the investigator’s and sponsor’s agreement to the protocol. If the protocol is not signed and dated by both parties, a corresponding declaration that is signed and dated by both must be provided to the LMHRA with the application.

National Research Ethics Board of Liberia

The LBR-32 requires the following elements to be included in the research protocol template submission:

Specific aims
Background and significance of research
Research locations and collaborating sites
Study team
Study design
Recruitment methods
Consent process
HIPAA privacy protections
Vulnerable populations
Risks
Benefits
Participant privacy
Data confidentiality
Data/statistical analysis plan
Costs and compensation
Sharing study results
Research related injuries
Reportable events
Regulatory compliance
Data or specimen banking (repositories)
Clinical trials
Device, if applicable
Drug/biologic
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia/Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

Per the NatResHlthPlcy, Liberian ECs including the NREB and the ACRE IRB, should structure the research protocol according to the follow format:

Title
Investigators’/Researchers’ information including contact addresses
Abstract/Summary
Background/Introduction
Aims and objectives
Study design and methods
Data collection, management, and analysis
Study administration and ethical issues
Resource requirements
Study plan
Supervision
Dissemination and outcome
For more details, see Annex 2 of the NatResHlthPlcy.

Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

According to the G-ACRE-IRB, the clinical research protocol should contain the elements included in the ACRE IRB submission form (see Article XXV in the G-ACRE-IRB). The initial protocol submission should also contain:

Original protocol (including cover sheet, abstract, and research section including the Human Subjects Section)
Application letter
ICF and/or assent form
Sample questions survey
Investigator(s) CVs
Qualification of study site(s)
Protocol budget
Copy of ACRE IRB approval, if available
Study design
Study participation, including informed consent procedures and content/language and participant information sheet content (See also the Documentation Requirements section)
Note: Per the G-ACRE-IRB, for regular renewal or interim modification reviews of a protocol, PIs should attach current consent document(s) and include instruments ONLY if changes are being proposed (Article XXV (Section 25.02) in the G-ACRE-IRB).

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Overview

According to the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) and the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) reviews may be conducted in parallel. However, per the G-LibClinTrial and the G-NREB, the LMHRA will only issue final approval once NREB approval is obtained.

Regulatory Authority Approval

The LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial indicate that upon receipt of a clinical trial application, the LMHRA screens the application package for completeness and must inform the applicant in writing about the validity of the application or the formal grounds for non-acceptance of the application within 10 working days of application receipt. If applicable, the applicant, in turn, must address formal grounds for non-acceptance within 10 working days.

The LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial further explain that after validation of a complete clinical trial application, the LMHRA must inform the applicant in writing about the outcome of the scientific assessment of the application within a maximum of 60 working days, or according to the following timeline for the different types of investigational products (IPs), unless otherwise specified by the LMHRA on a case-by-case basis:

Pharmaceutical IPs: 45 working days
Biological and biotechnology IPs: 60 working days
Genetically modified organism IPs: 90 working days
As indicated in the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, these timelines exclude time taken for the applicant to respond to queries from the LMHRA during the review and decision process. If changes are required and the applicant fails to modify the application within a maximum of 30 working days, the application will be rejected. Per the G-LibClinTrial, during the clinical trial scientific assessment process, the LMHRA may request additional documents or changes through a query letter. Once a query has been raised and issued to the applicant, the process stops when the LMHRA receives a written response to the query. If the LMHRA requires changes to the application, and the applicant fails to modify the application within a maximum of 90 days, the application will be rejected.

As explained in the G-LibClinTrial, the LMHRA must issue a clinical trial certificate indicating the LMHRA clinical trial number to the applicant upon application approval. The clinical trial certificate may contain conditions required by the LMHRA with respect to the conduct or reporting of the trial. If the application is rejected, the applicant can submit a written appeal to the LMHRA’s Managing Director within 60 days of receipt of the rejection notice.

Per the G-LibClinTrial, in the case of expedited clinical trial application reviews, the LMHRA will review the application in no more than 14 working days for approved products and within 21 days for new products.

Additionally, per the G-LibClinTrial, the LMHRA must respond to any substantial clinical trial amendment within 20 calendar days upon receipt of the written decision from the NREB.

Ethics Committee Approval

National Research Ethics Board of Liberia

Pursuant to the G-NREB, principal investigators (PIs) are required to submit new research protocols no later than one (1) month prior to the next bi-monthly board meeting. The NREB should notify PIs in writing of its decision within two (2) weeks following a board meeting, where applicable, following a complete review of the protocols. The G-NREB does not specify an approval expiration date.

The G-NREB explains that for protocol amendments, the NREB Secretariat, in consultation with the Chair, will make a determination regarding the type of review (full board review or expedited given the risk) and will notify the investigator within three (3) weeks upon submission per the board’s decision. Expedited reviews must take no more than three (3) weeks, and if any committee member raises a concern about a protocol that was expedited, the protocol must undergo a full board review.

Refer to the G-NREB for additional information on the various submission types that may be submitted to the board and their corresponding review and approval processes.

Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

As specified in the G-ACRE-IRB, PIs are required to submit all application materials to the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB) four (4) weeks in advance of the date that a decision is requested. (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the NREB and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.) In the case of full review studies, submission is required four (4) weeks prior to the next scheduled ACRE IRB meeting. The ACRE IRB will convene a special meeting, if necessary, to accommodate the PI’s compliance with an external funding deadline; however, submission is required four (4) weeks prior to the special meeting date.

As specified in the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB approval will commence on the day the study is approved and will expire within a defined time period based on a risk assessment and regulations. If specific conditions are stipulated in the approval letter, those conditions must be met by the designated date or approval may be withdrawn. No timeline of review is specified for the ACRE IRB’s review. However, the G-ACRE-IRB states that the clinical research protocol and accompanying documents are approved as they are submitted.

The G-ACRE-IRB states that the ACRE IRB must also review and approve any clinical research protocol amendments prior to those changes being implemented. The clinical research protocol submission is reviewed either via expedited procedures (for minor changes) or via full board review (for all other changes). Refer to the G-ACRE-IRB for clinical research protocol amendment documentation submission and procedural requirements.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the LMHRA-Act, the LibCTReg, and the G-LibClinTrial, a clinical trial can only commence after the sponsor or the representative receives authorization from the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA). The LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, in turn, state that the sponsor, the legal representative, the principal investigator (PI), or the sponsor-investigator must obtain written permission from the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB). In addition, per the G-LibClinTrial, the appointed PI must provide proof of residency in Liberia in the clinical trial application submission package.

As per the G-LibClinTrial, the sponsor or the representative is required to obtain LMHRA approval for the clinical trial before the import of an investigational product (IP) to be used in the trial is authorized. However, parallel submission for approval of the clinical trial and the permit to import the IP is possible if the import permit application is included in the clinical trial application submission package.

In addition, per the LibCTReg, the applicant must inform the LMHRA in writing of the exact clinical trial commencement date (i.e., first patient first visit). If the trial does not begin within 90 calendar days from issuance of the clinical trial certificate, the applicant must show cause for the failure to commence as scheduled and solicit issuance of a new clinical trial certificate. Pursuant to Part VIII of the LMHRA-Act, the LibCTReg delineates that failure to inform the LMHRA of the commencement or not starting the clinical trial within this period will have regulatory implications including, but not limited to, the payment of administrative charges for the re-issuance of the clinical trial certificate on its expiration.

The LibCTReg also states that the sponsor, the investigator, and all of the persons involved in the clinical trial must fulfill the requirements of good clinical practice in accordance with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) and the World Health Organization (WHO)'s Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (LBR-25) as determined by the LMHRA. The G-LibClinTrial further specifies that the LMHRA has adopted LBR-8 for use along with the LMHRA guidelines.

Clinical Trial Agreement

While a signed clinical trial agreement is not an official requirement, the G-LibClinTrial states that the protocol should contain a statement that the trial will be conducted in compliance with the protocol, LBR-8, and the applicable regulatory requirements. The protocol should also be signed and dated by both the sponsor or the representative and the PI to document the investigator’s and the sponsor’s agreement to the protocol. If the protocol is not signed and dated by both parties, a corresponding declaration signed and dated by both must be provided to the LMHRA with the application.

Clinical Trial Registration

As delineated in the LibCTReg, the sponsor or the sponsor-investigator must register all clinical trials with a public international database. The G-LibClinTrial further specifies that the LMHRA requires the sponsor or the representative to provide proof of registration with the Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (PACTR) (LBR-36) or another WHO Primary Registry (LBR-35).

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

According to the LibCTReg, the G-LibPV, and the G-ACRE-IRB, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Liberia’s safety reporting requirements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Adverse Event (or Adverse Experience) (AE) – Any untoward medical occurrence in a participant to whom a medicinal product has been administered, including occurrences which are not necessarily caused by or related to that product, or any abnormal sign (e.g., any abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, temporally associated with the participant’s involvement in the research; AEs encompass both physical and psychological harms
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – Any noxious and unintended responses in a participant to an investigational medicinal product which is related to any dose administered to that participant. A causal relationship between a medicinal product and an adverse event is at least a reasonable possibility, i.e., the relationship cannot be ruled out
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, is a congenital anomaly/birth defect, or may jeopardize the participant’s health and may require medical or surgical intervention based upon appropriate medical judgment (e.g., the development of drug dependency or drug abuse). A causal relationship between a medicinal product and an adverse event is at least a reasonable possibility, i.e., the relationship cannot be ruled out
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction – An adverse reaction where the nature or severity is inconsistent with the applicable product information (e.g., Investigator's Brochure for an unapproved investigational product (IP) or package insert/summary of product characteristics for an approved product)
Safety Reporting Requirements

Per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the principal investigator (PI) or the sponsor should report any SAEs/SADRs suspected to be related to the IP immediately, and in any event, no later than three (3) calendar days after becoming aware of the event to the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) and the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB). Per the G-LibClinTrial, in the case of multicenter trials involving clinical trial sites (in and outside of Liberia), the PI or sponsor must submit all SAEs/SADRs deemed to be related to the IP within 15 calendar days to the LMHRA and the NREB. The PI or the sponsor is also required to indicate the timelines allocated for related investigations.

The G-LibPV provides the following scale by which to assess the severity of AEs/ADRs: Mild, Moderate, Severe, or Fatal. For more details, see Table 2 in G-LibPV. The G-LibPV also provides criteria for determining the link between the intervention and the AEs/ADRs as either certain, probably/likely, possible, unlikely, conditional/unclassified, or un-assessable/unclassified. For more details, see Table 3 in G-LibPV.

Investigator Responsibilities

The G-NREB indicates that investigators are required to submit a report to the NREB for all AEs except those resulting in death within seven (7) calendar days. Investigator(s) must report all deaths that are possibly, probably, or definitely related to the study within 24 hours to the NREB.

Other events that must be reported to the NREB include the following:

Unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others
Non-compliance (including major protocol deviations and non-compliance unrelated to a protocol deviation)
New information that might affect the willingness of participants to enroll or continue to participate in the study
As indicated in the G-ACRE-IRB, for studies using the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB), the investigator must promptly report any unanticipated problems to the ACRE IRB in accordance with the following guidelines (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the NREB and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.):

Unanticipated problems that are SAEs must be reported to the ACRE IRB within five (5) business days of the investigator becoming aware of the event. The board strongly recommends that a preliminary report be submitted by the investigator within 48 hours of learning of the SAE with a formal follow-up report submitted within the above timeline
Any other unanticipated problem should be reported to the ACRE IRB within two (2) weeks of the investigator becoming aware of the problem. The board strongly recommends that a preliminary report be submitted by the investigator within five (5) business days of learning of the unanticipated problem with a formal follow-up report submitted within the above timeline
In addition, per the G-ACRE-IRB, when making a report to the ACRE IRB, the investigator should include the following information:

The appropriate identifying information for the research protocol, such as the title, the investigator’s name, and the ethics committee (EC) project number
A detailed description of the AE, incident, experience, or outcome; however, to maintain confidentiality, participants’ names and identifiable information should not be included in the report
An explanation of the basis for determining that the AE, incident, experience, or outcome represents an unanticipated problem
A description of any changes to the protocol or other corrective actions that have been taken or are proposed in response to the unanticipated problem
Other Safety Reports

As explained in the G-ACRE-IRB, for studies using the ACRE IRB, the ACRE IRB Executive Committee conducts the initial review of unanticipated problems. This committee is authorized to take the following actions in response to any incident report:

Conduct an administrative review of the report, including assessing whether the incident constitutes an unanticipated problem
If a convened ACRE IRB review is needed, the Chair assigns the incident report for review at the next available regularly scheduled ACRE IRB meeting
Alternately, the ACRE IRB Executive Committee may convene an emergency meeting of the ACRE IRB to review the report
If the ACRE IRB Executive Committee finds that the rights, safety, and welfare of the participants are jeopardized by the research, the Chair may suspend the research until such time when the full ACRE IRB can convene to review the report. When reviewing a particular incident, experience, or outcome reported as an unanticipated problem by the investigator, the board may determine that the incident, experience, or outcome does not meet the criteria for an unanticipated problem
Following a review of the unanticipated problem report, per the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB may require the following actions, in order to protect the ongoing safety of the research participants:

Modification of participant inclusion or exclusion criteria to mitigate the newly identified risks
Implementation of additional procedures for monitoring participants
Modification of informed consent documents to include a description of newly recognized risks
Addition of provisions about newly recognized risks to previously enrolled participants
Suspension of enrollment of new participants
Suspension of research procedures in currently enrolled participants
Suspension of the entire study
Termination of approval for the entire study
Per the G-ACRE-IRB, if the solution to an unanticipated problem is to amend the research protocol and/or informed consent forms, then an amendment request must be made to the ACRE IRB. If the changes are minor, they may be reviewed by expedited review procedures. If the changes are major, they must be reviewed and approved by the convened board. Changes made in response to an unanticipated problem must be reviewed and approved by the ACRE IRB before being implemented, except where implementation is necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to research participants.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority

As per the G-LibPV, all SAEs/SADRs and SUSARs must be reported on the LMHRA’s Suspected Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting Form (Annex 3 in the G-LibClinTrial).

Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

Per LBR-28, since all clinical trials protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB for review, all AEs/ADRs and SAEs/SADRs are only sent to the NREB.

National Research Ethics Board of Liberia

No information is available on NREB safety reporting forms and delivery requirements.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority

Pursuant to the LibCTReg, the applicant must submit to the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) and the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) progress reports containing safety updates and duly signed and authenticated Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) reports, as specified in the corresponding clinical trial guidelines. As specified in the G-LibClinTrial, the applicant must provide a progress report at least annually on the clinical trial to the LMHRA, unless otherwise stipulated in the clinical trial certificate. The report should contain recruitment status, safety updates, and DSMB reports, as well as an update on the use and results collected on biological samples exported out of Liberia, if applicable.

National Research Ethics Board of Liberia

As indicated in the G-NREB, for continuing review submissions, PIs must submit review reports to the NREB Secretariat at least eight (8) weeks prior to the approved protocol’s expiration. See LBR-6 for the NREB Continuing Review Form. Additionally, according to LBR-38, the NREB is also using LBR-24 for continuing review, for annual reports, and as a final report to close a study.

Per the G-LibClinTrial and the G-NREB, research in Liberia should comply with the International Council for Harmonisation's (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8). As part of the country’s compliance with LBR-8, the investigator should submit written summaries of the trial status to the NREB annually, or more frequently, if requested by the board. The investigator should also promptly provide written reports to the sponsor, the NREB, and where applicable, the institution on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to participants.

Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

For clinical research studies using the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB), the G-ACRE-IRB requires the principal investigator(s) (PIs) to submit progress reports (also referred to as continuing review submissions in Liberia) to the ACRE IRB. If no work was conducted on a study during the last approval period, the PIs should explain why (e.g., too busy with other projects; a delay in funding; or unable to hire a graduate student to work on the project). If the PI(s) are closing the study, a copy of any publications or manuscripts resulting from the study should be attached. (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the NREB and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.)

As indicated in the G-ACRE-IRB, the following list provides the required documentation to submit a continuing review to the ACRE IRB:

A completed Continuing Review form
A copy of the current informed consent document(s) or any newly proposed consent document(s) if enrollment is ongoing
A copy of current recruitment material(s) or any newly proposed recruitment material(s) if enrollment is ongoing
A summary of adverse events and any unanticipated problems involving risks to participants
Numbers of and reason for withdrawal of participants from the research
A summary of any relevant information about risks associated with the research
Number and demographics of participants enrolled
Changes in the principal and/or associate investigator(s)
A summary description of participant experiences
Research results obtained thus far
A current risk-benefit assessment based on the study results
Any new information since the ACRE IRB’s last review
After the Secretary and the Coordinator have determined that the continuing review submission is complete, the documentation must be submitted to the ACRE IRB and reviewed by the convened board, or by the expedited reviewer(s), if necessary, for an expedited review.

Final Report

Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority

The LibCTReg states that the applicant is required to submit a final clinical trial summary report to the LMHRA. As per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the applicant must notify the LMHRA within 30 business days from the end of a clinical trial. Per the G-LibClinTrial, the end of the trial definition should be documented in the clinical trial protocol.

The LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial also indicate that the applicant must submit a closeout report with a copy of the LMHRA-issued disposal certificate to the LMHRA. The G-LibClinTrial specifies this report should be submitted within 90 days from completion of the clinical trial. (See Annex 5 of the G-LibClinTrial for closeout report form).

In addition, per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the applicant must submit a comprehensive end of study report conforming to the ICH’s Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (LBR-37) guidelines, within one (1) year from the trial’s completion.

Per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the end of study report must also contain any adverse events reported by the PIs.

Per LBR-8, the investigator, where applicable, should inform the institution; the investigator/institution should provide the ethics committee with a summary of the trial’s outcome, and the regulatory authority (LMHRA) with any reports required.

National Research Ethics Board

The LibCTReg states that the applicant is required to submit a final clinical trial summary report to the NREB. The applicant must also notify the NREB within 30 business days from the end of a clinical trial.

Additionally, per the LibCTReg, the PI must also inform the NREB of any adverse events as part of the end of study report.

The LibCTReg further specifies that the applicant must submit a comprehensive end of study report to the NREB conforming to the LBR-37 guidelines, within one (1) year from the trial’s completion.

According to LBR-38, the NREB is using LBR-24 for continuing review, for annual reports, and as a final report to close a study.

Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

Per the G-ACRE-IRB, PI(s) should complete Section 12 (Disposition of Project) of the ACRE IRB Submission Form (Section 25.02 in Article XXV of the G-ACRE-IRB) for the final ACRE IRB review. For the board’s purposes, the project has ended when there is no further participant enrollment, intervention(s), or data collection, and the remaining data are either de-identified or maintained with safeguards. The PI(s) should use this section to describe the disposition of the project and its data and provide a brief summary of their findings.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
As stated in the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with LMHRA guidelines. Per LBR-8 and the LibCTReg, the sponsor is defined as an individual, company, institution, or organization that takes responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a clinical trial.

LBR-8 and the LibCTReg also define a sponsor-investigator as an individual who both initiates and conducts an investigation, and under whose immediate direction the investigational product is administered or dispensed. The term does not include any person other than an individual. The obligations of a sponsor-investigator include both those of a sponsor and those of an investigator.

In addition, per the LibCTReg, the sponsor may hire a contract research organization (CRO) (commercial, academic, or other) to perform one (1) or more of the sponsor’s trial-related duties and functions. LBR-8 further explains that although a sponsor may transfer responsibility for any or all of the sponsor’s obligations to a CRO, the ultimate responsibility for the trial data’s quality and integrity always resides with the sponsor. The sponsor should also ensure oversight of any trial-related duties and functions carried out on its behalf, including trial-related duties and functions that are subcontracted to another party by the sponsor’s CRO. Any trial-related responsibilities transferred to a CRO should be specified in writing. The CRO should implement quality assurance and quality control.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Overview

According to the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with LMHRA guidelines. Per LBR-8, the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical trial. Each investigator should be qualified by training and experience and should have adequate resources to properly conduct the trial for which the investigator is selected. LBR-8 also explains that the sponsor should utilize appropriately qualified individuals to supervise the overall conduct of the trial, to handle the data, to verify the data, to conduct the statistical analyses, and to prepare the trial reports.

As indicated in LBR-8, the investigator(s) should be qualified by education, training, and experience to assume responsibility for the proper conduct of the trial, should meet all the qualifications specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and should provide evidence of such qualifications through up-to-date curriculum vitae (CV) and/or other relevant documentation requested by the sponsor, the ethics committee (EC), and/or the regulatory authority(ies) (see section 4 in LBR-8 for detailed investigator requirements).

As stated in the G-LibClinTrial, all investigators must be trained in good clinical practices (GCP) documented by the provision of training certificates not older than three (3) years at the time of application. Any other training or experience from previous clinical trials and patient care as needed for the conduct of the trial must be provided for the investigators to prove their qualifications. The principal investigators (PIs) should have acted as PI or at least as an investigator in at least one (1) prior clinical trial and must provide proof of residency in Liberia in the clinical trial application submission package. The LibCTReg also states that the trial is to be conducted in an appropriate facility by a suitably qualified investigator in a responsible manner and managed by an investigator who can provide evidence of sufficient experience in the conduct of clinical trials as determined by the LMHRA.

Per the G-NREB, PIs are also required to be able to provide a current Certificate of Training in GCP for PIs, be qualified to undertake the particular study, and be knowledgeable in the values and tenets of ethical and regulatory principles and scientific method applications associated with conducting research in human participants.

In addition, the G-LibClinTrial requires the applicant to provide details of the site(s) where the clinical trial is to be conducted and a duly justified written statement on the suitability of the trial sites adapted to the nature and use of the investigational product in the clinical trial application submission package. The statement should include a description of the suitability of facilities, equipment, human resources, and description of expertise, issued by the head of the clinic/institution at the trial site or by some other responsible person.

Furthermore, per LBR-8, the sponsor should obtain the investigator's/institution's agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with GCP, the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and the approved protocol
Comply with procedures for data recording/reporting
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain the trial related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution these documents are no longer needed
The sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

No information is available on foreign sponsor requirements.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

As per the G-LibClinTrial, the sponsor or the representative should provide information on the composition of the Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) in the clinical trial application submission package. This information should include the list of members, the terms of reference, and the CVs of its members to justify their expertise as members of the DSMB.

LBR-8 further indicates that the sponsor may consider establishing a DSMB (also known as an independent data monitoring committee (IDMC)) to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial. The DSMB should have written operating procedures and maintain written records of all its meetings.

Multicenter Studies

As delineated in LBR-8, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and are given EC approval
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication among investigators is facilitated
Further, per LBR-8, if the organization of a coordinating committee and/or selection of coordinating investigator(s) are to be used in multicenter trials, their organization and/or selection are the sponsor's responsibility.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Insurance

As set forth in the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the applicant should include documentation in the clinical trial application submission package to verify active clinical trial insurance that covers phases I, II, and III, proof of professional indemnity (malpractice insurance), and proof of sponsor indemnification for investigators and the trial site. The LibCTReg also notes that an indemnity in the form determined by the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) is to be signed by the participant protecting the LMHRA from liability related to an injury or an adverse event which may be sustained by a person, directly or indirectly, as a result of the conduct of the trial and which occurs or reveals itself at the time of the trial or subsequently.

The G-LibClinTrial also specifies that a study insurance certificate and an indemnity provision should be current and valid for the full duration of the trial and follow-up period. If the validity is shorter, a written renewal commitment for the trial duration is required. The certificate should contain a reference to the clinical trial, the clinical trial protocol number, and the countries to which the insurance cover is extended. The insurance cover should be provided from an internationally recognized company. Additionally, the LibCTReg, requires an insurance policy to be in place to provide benefits in the event that a clinical trial participant suffers injury or death related to the study.

Per LBR-29, both clinical trial insurance and indemnification certificates must be included in the clinical trial application dossier in accordance with the African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF)’s Clinical Trial Application Checklist (LBR-1). According to LBR-4, the AVAREF was established by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2006 to promote the harmonization of ethics and regulatory processes in Africa.

In addition, per the G-LibClinTrial, under certain circumstances, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) may accept an expedited application and review process for clinical trials (e.g., epidemics or other urgent public health interests requiring fast use of new medicines or health products and/or fast gathering of health product information). In the case of trials involving human participants, the applicant must provide proof of current, relevant, and appropriate study insurance for all participants or professional indemnity insurance for investigators as part of the application submission package to be sent to the LMHRA. Furthermore, as specified in the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the LMHRA has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines. LBR-8 states that if required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), the sponsor should provide insurance or should indemnify (legal and financial coverage) the investigator/the institution against claims arising from the trial, except for claims that arise from malpractice and/or negligence.

Compensation

Injury or Death

Per LBR-8, the sponsor or the representative is responsible for providing compensation to research participants and/or their legal heirs in the event of trial-related injuries or death.

LBR-8 states that the sponsor's policies and procedures should address the treatment costs of trial participants in the event of trial-related injuries, and when trial participants receive compensation, the method and manner of compensation should comply with applicable regulatory requirement(s). According to LBR-29, the LMHRA does not have a compensation committee.

In addition, per the LibCTReg, any person(s), institution(s), corporate entity(ies), their designees, or legal representative(s) who does not provide insurance coverage for prospective participants as required, and in the course of the research bodily injury or substantial harm results, the person(s), institution(s), corporate entity(ies), their designees, or legal representative(s) commits a first degree misdemeanor consistent with the PenalLaw. The PenalLaw states a person commits a misdemeanor of the first degree if the person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a substantial risk of death or serious bodily injury to another.

Pursuant to Part VIII of the LMHRA-Act, the LibCTReg also specifies that the principal investigator or organization is subject to an action of damages for any Serious Adverse Event (SAE)/Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) that is life-threatening, or results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity or congenital anomaly/birth defect, during the conduct of a clinical trial. Additionally, any SAE that results in the death of a participant during the conduct of a clinical trial must constitute negligent homicide consistent with the PenalLaw which states that a person is guilty of negligent homicide if the person causes the death of another human being negligently; negligent homicide is a felony of the third degree.

Trial Participation

Per LBR-8, the participant should be provided with information regarding any anticipated prorated payment, if any, for participating in the trial.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As specified in the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)'s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines. Per LBR-8, sponsors are responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol.

Per LBR-8, the sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, focusing on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that includes:

During protocol development, identifying processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results
Identifying risks to critical trial processes and data
Evaluating the identified risks against existing risk controls
Deciding which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept
Documenting quality management activities and communicate to those involved in or affected by these activities
Periodically reviewing risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant
In the clinical study report, describing the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarize important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken (Refer to the ICH’s Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) guidelines (LBR-37))
Pursuant to Part VIII of the LMHRA-Act, the LibCTReg states that any person(s), institution(s), corporate entity(ies), their designees, or legal representatives who violates the clinical trial authorization procedures, the serious adverse event notification requirements, and/or the suspension/withdrawal provisions delineated in the LibCTReg will be liable to pay administrative fines. See the LibCTReg for details.

Monitoring Requirements

Per LBR-8, if or when sponsors perform audits as part of implementing quality assurance, they should consider the following:

The purpose of the audit should be to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, good clinical practice (GCP), and applicable regulatory requirements
The selection and qualification of auditors who are independent of clinical trials/systems to conduct audits; the sponsors should ensure the auditors are qualified by training and experience to conduct audits properly and have appropriate qualifications that should be documented
Auditing procedures that ensure the auditing of clinical trials/systems is conducted in accordance with the sponsor’s written procedures on what to audit, how to audit, the frequency of audits, and the form and content of audit reports
In addition, per LBR-8, the sponsor should develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The extent and nature of monitoring is flexible and permits varied approaches that improve effectiveness and efficiency. The sponsor may choose on-site monitoring, a combination of on-site and centralized monitoring, or where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan).

Refer to LBR-8 additional audit procedure details.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

Pursuant to the LibCTReg, if the trial is suspended or terminated before its purpose is achieved, the applicant must convey the reason(s) in writing to the LMHRA and the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) within 10 working days and all information must be provided as determined by the LMHRA. The G-LibClinTrial also states that the applicant must inform the LMHRA of a clinical trial suspension or premature termination of a clinical trial within 10 working days and clearly explain the reasons for this decision. LBR-8 further explains that if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor should promptly inform the investigator(s)/institution(s) and the regulatory authority(ies) of the termination or suspension and the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. The ethics committee (EC) should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor or by the investigator/institution, as specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s). Additionally, according to LBR-8, if it is discovered that noncompliance significantly affects or has the potential to significantly affect participant protection or reliability of trial results, the sponsor should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions. Further, the sponsor should promptly inform the EC and provide the reason(s) for the termination or suspension.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

As specified in the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)'s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines.

As per LBR-8, when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor must ensure that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. Sponsors should base their approach to validate such systems on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use and the potential of the system to affect participant protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, sponsors should maintain standard operation procedures (SOPs) for the systems that cover system setup, installation, and use. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the system users should be provided with training in their use. Refer to LBR-8 for additional information.

Records Management

The G-LibClinTrial specifies that the principal investigator (PI) must keep an Investigator Site File (ISF), and the sponsor must keep a Trial Master File (TMF) containing essential documents relating to the clinical trial, which provide verification for the trial conduct and the quality of the data generated, taking into account all trial characteristics. The files must be readily available and directly accessible upon request from the LMHRA. The sponsor and the investigator must archive the contents of the TMF and ISF, respectively, for at least 25 years after the end of the trial including the medical files of study participants.

As set forth in LBR-8, the sponsor should inform the investigator(s)/institution(s) in writing of the need for record retention and should notify the investigator(s)/institution(s) in writing when the trial related records are no longer needed. Sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained for at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application, until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications, or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of the investigational product’s clinical development. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed.

In addition, LBR-8 states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial. Per LBR-8, the sponsor should ensure the protocol or other written agreement specify that the investigator(s)/institution(s) provide direct access to source data/documents for trial related monitoring, audits, ethics committee review, and regulatory inspection.

As per the G-LibClinTrial, data handling and recordkeeping should be conducted in conformity with the World Health Organization's Good Clinical Practice Guidelines (LBR-25) (refer to Section 8 for details).

Per the G-ACRE-IRB, for clinical research studies using the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB), the ACRE IRB must retain all relevant records (e.g., study documents specific to board activities and administrative documents related to ACRE IRB internal operations) per the following timelines (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.):

All records regarding a research application (regardless of whether it is approved) must be retained for at least three (3) years
All records regarding all applications that are approved, and the research initiated must be retained for at least three (3) years after completion of the research
Denied applications will be treated as terminated files and records must be retained for three (3) years after the denial of the research
The G-ACRE-IRB further explains the research records from a study must be retained by the investigator(s) for a period of no more than five (5) years following the closure date. If other regulations and policies apply to a particular protocol, then the duration of protocol retention is in accordance with the applicable regulations/policies. For detailed ACRE IRB recordkeeping requirements, refer to the G-ACRE-IRB.

The G-ACRE-IRB also specifies that although a research protocol has been closed, the investigator(s) should keep the data they have collected, including identifiable private data, in a manner consistent with the board-approved protocol and participant consent requirements. The investigator(s) must continue to honor any confidentiality protections of the data. Refer to the Informed Consent topic for additional information on documentation requirements and research participant rights during the informed consent process.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Responsible Parties

No information is available related to responsible parties for personal data protection.

Data Protection

No information is available related to data protection.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

As stated in the LibCTReg, the clinical trial participant must be informed of the purpose and scope of the collection and use of personal data, especially medical data. The trial participant must be informed especially of the fact that where necessary, the collected data should be:

Kept available for inspection by the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) or for monitoring or auditing by the sponsor in order to verify the proper conduct of the clinical trial
Be passed on to the sponsor and the LMHRA without disclosing the identity of the trial participant
Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In accordance with the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines. Per LBR-8, a freely given informed consent must be obtained from every study participant prior to clinical trial participation. According to the G-ACRE-IRB, the G-NREB, and LBR-8, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by an ethics committee (EC).

As delineated in the LibCTReg, the trial participant should be informed of the nature, significance, and implications of the clinical trial and have given a voluntary written informed consent. The trial participant or witness, if applicable, must be informed by an investigator, who is a healthcare professional or a person designated by the investigator, and who is knowledgeable about the nature, significance, risks, and implications of the clinical trial as well as about the participant’s right to withdraw from the clinical trial at any time. A generally comprehensible information sheet is to be handed out to the participant. The trial participant is also to be given the opportunity to have a counseling session with an investigator or a person designated by the investigator about the other conditions surrounding the conduct of the clinical trial.

The LibCTReg further notes that a declaration of consent to participate in a clinical trial can be revoked at any time in the presence of the investigator or a member of the investigating team, orally or in writing, without disadvantage to the trial participant. In the case of a revocation of consent, the study participant must decide whether their stored data may continue to be used.

Per the G-ACRE-IRB, the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB) must assess the study to ensure the voluntary, non-coercive recruitment of research participants. The board must ensure that they have adequately considered the following in the protocol (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.):

Procedures for obtaining informed consent
Content of the participant information sheet
Content and language of the informed consent document
Translation of the informed consent document into the local language
The language used in the documents should be simple relative to the general public’s level of understanding
Contact persons with their addresses and telephone numbers (for both the study team and the EC)
Privacy and confidentiality
Risks (physical, mental, social)
Benefits to participants and to others
Compensation (reasonable/unreasonable)
Involvement of vulnerable participants
Provision for medical/psychosocial support
Treatment for study-related injuries
Use of biological materials
Per the G-ACRE-IRB, if the informed consent procedures and consent document(s) are reviewed by the ACRE IRB Secretariat and found to be complete, the documentation is then submitted to the board for review. If the documentation qualifies for expedited review, the chairperson or a designated expedited reviewer will evaluate the materials. After the investigator makes the required changes suggested by the ACRE IRB, the application may be approved by the chair.

(See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the ACRE IRB and NREB forms. Refer to LBR-33 for the NREB Exempt Human Research Consent Script Form and LBR-34 for the NREB Short Consent Form.)

LBR-8 states that the investigator or the designated representative must provide detailed research study information to the participant or legal representative/guardian. LBR-8 further specifies that the oral and written information concerning the trial, including the ICF, should be easy to understand and presented without coercion or unduly influencing a potential participant to enroll in the clinical trial. The participant or legal representative/guardian, should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate.

Further, per LBR-8, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or the legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive the legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representatives from their liabilities for any negligence.

Re-Consent

According to LBR-8, the LMHRA and an EC should approve any change in the ICF due to a protocol modification before such changes are implemented. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that might be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial. The participant or legal representative/guardian will also be required to re-sign the revised ICF and receive a copy of any amended documentation.

In addition, per the G-ACRE-IRB, in the case that ACRE IRB approval is reinstated, the ACRE IRB may require previously enrolled participants to re-consent.

Language Requirements

As stated in the G-LibClinTrial, all clinical trial application documentation must be submitted in English. If documents are written in another language, a certified translation is required.

Documenting Consent

The LibCTReg states that if the trial participant is unable to read or write English, the informed consent should be obtained in the language the participant understands and in the presence of at least one (1) witness. The witness, who should be able to read and write English and understand the local language in which the trial participant is informed, should not be a member of the investigating team. The consent given by the trial participant must be documented in writing, dated, and signed by the witness and thumb printed by the trial participant.

Per LBR-8, before participating in the study, the participant or legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF. The participant or legal representative/guardian should also receive a copy of the signed and dated consent form updates and a copy of any amendments to the written information provided to the participants.

LBR-34 also provides a sample NREB ICF for adults capable of consent. A witness must also be present during the consent process and the witness must sign and date the ICF. The number of copies to be signed and distributed is not specified.

Per LBR-8, if a participant is unable to read or if a legally acceptable representative is unable to read, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. The witness should sign and date the ICF after the following steps have occurred:

The written ICF and any other written information provided to the participant is read and explained to the participant and legal representative/guardian
The participant and legal representative/guardian, have orally consented to the participant’s involvement in the trial, and has personally signed and dated the ICF, if capable of doing so
Waiver of Consent

As specified in the G-ACRE-IRB, to obtain a waiver or alteration of informed consent, the investigator must include the request (and provide justification for the waiver or alteration) in the protocol submission to the ACRE IRB. The request for waiver or alteration will be reviewed by the convened board, the ACRE IRB Chair, or the designated expedited reviewer. The ACRE IRB reviewer (Chair or designee) may approve the waiver or alteration of informed consent, if the board reviewer can establish that the research is to be conducted by or subject to the approval of state or local government officials and is designed to study, evaluate, or otherwise examine:

Public benefit or service programs
Procedures for obtaining benefits or services under those programs
Possible changes in or alternatives to those programs or procedures, or
Possible changes in methods or levels of payment for benefits or services under those programs
The ACRE IRB reviewer should also be able to ascertain that the research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver or alteration.

Additionally, per the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB reviewer may approve the waiver or alteration of informed consent, if the reviewer determines the following:

The research involves no more than minimal risk to the participants
The research could not practicably be conducted without the requested waiver or alteration
If the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, the research could not practicably be carried out without using such information or biospecimens in an identifiable format
The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the participants, and
Whenever appropriate, the participants or legal representative/guardian will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation. The ACRE IRB reviewer will document the findings for waiver or alteration of informed consent. An alteration to informed consent may apply when conducting a study where there is deception or an incomplete disclosure (for example, studies that require deception because the study would be compromised if participants were told the true purpose)
In addition, the G-ACRE-IRB explains that a waiver of a signed ICF may be appropriate for some research studies such as survey or interview studies containing highly sensitive questions (e.g., health status, sexual practices, criminal behavior, etc.), or surveys containing non-sensitive information. To obtain a waiver of documented (signed) informed consent, the investigator must include the request (and provide justification for the waiver or alteration) in the protocol submission process. The request for waiver or alteration will be reviewed by the convened ACRE IRB, the Chair, or the designated expedited reviewer. The ACRE IRB reviewer will consider the investigator’s request and review the request to determine if:

The only record linking the participant and the research would be the consent document, and the principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality
The research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to participants and involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context
The participants or legal representative/guardian are members of a distinct cultural group or community in which signing forms is not the norm, that the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to participants, and provided that there is an appropriate alternative mechanism for documenting that informed consent was obtained. In cases where the documentation requirement is waived, the ACRE IRB may require the investigator to provide participants with a written statement regarding the research, such as an information sheet, instead of an informed consent document
Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority

As specified in the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) to comply with informed consent requirements for use along with the LMHRA guidelines.

LBR-8 states that the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable:

The study involves research and an explanation of its purpose
Trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
Trial procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The participant’s responsibilities in participating in the trial
Experimental aspects of the study
Any foreseeable risks or discomforts to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
Alternative procedures or treatment that may be available to the participant, and if any, which might be advantageous to the participant
Compensation and/or medical treatment available to the participant or the participant’s family or dependents in the event of a trial-related injury
Any expected benefits or prorated payment to the participant for participating in the trial
Any additional costs to the participant that may result from participation in the research
Participation is voluntary, the participant may withdraw at any time, and refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits, or reduction in the level of care to which the participant is otherwise entitled
The LMHRA, the monitor(s), the auditor(s), and the ethics committee (EC) will be granted direct access to the participant’s original medical records to verify clinical trial procedures and/or data without violating the participant’s confidentiality
A statement describing the extent to which, if any, confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained, and if the results of the trial are published, the participant’s identity will remain confidential
The participant or legal representative/guardian will be notified in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the course of the study which may affect the participant's willingness to continue
The person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without the participant’s consent
The expected duration of the participant's participation
Approximate number of participants involved in the trial
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia

The following elements are to be included in the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB)’s Exempt Human Research Consent Script Form (LBR-33) and the NREB Short Consent Form (LBR-34) respectively (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Indication that the person is being asked to take part in a research study
Research study purpose and reason for participant’s eligibility to participate in study
Duration of research study
Participation is voluntary and participant may withdraw at any time
Explanation of study-specific procedures and sample questions provided to participants
Possible risks associated with participating in study
Benefits to participant or to others from participating in study
Appropriate alternative procedures, or courses of treatment, if any
Explanation of what is experimental vs. routine standard of care
Statement regarding who will have access to the participant’s personal information
Participant’s right to decline participating in any part of study for any reason and right to end participation at any time, and refusal to participate will not be held against the participant
Researcher’s contact information for any questions the participant may have prior to deciding to participate and throughout the participant’s involvement in the study
See LBR-33 and LBR-34 for additional details.

Per LBR-34, if applicable, the following information is also included in the NREB Short Consent Form:

Whether the participant will get treated or paid if injured
The possibility of unknown risks
When the participant may be taken off the research study without the participant’s agreement
Added costs from taking part in the study
What will happen if the participant stops taking part
Steps to safely stop taking part
What new information will be shared with the participant
The number of participants expected to take part in the study
What happens to the participant’s collected data if the participant withdraws from the trial
An explanation of the ClinicalTrials.gov (LBR-40) website
Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board

The G-ACRE-IRB indicates that the principal investigator (PI) is responsible for preparing the ICF and that the ICF should include the following statements or descriptions (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the NREB and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.):

The study involves research and an explanation of its purpose
The expected duration of a participant’s involvement in the research
A description of the procedures to be followed
Identification of any experimental study procedures
Any foreseeable risks or discomforts to the participant
Any benefits to the subject or to others that may reasonably be expected from the research
Alternative procedures or treatment that may be available to the participant, and if any, which might be advantageous to the participant
A statement describing the extent to which, if any, confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained
A statement noting the possibility that the EC (or its designees) and the study sponsor may inspect the study records, if the research is sponsored by a funding source
For research involving more than minimal risk, an explanation of compensation and/or medical treatment available to the participant or the family or dependents in the event of a trial-related injury, and if injury occurs, what the medical treatments consist of, or where further information may be obtained
The person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of research participants, and whom to contact in the event of research-related injury
Participation is voluntary, the participant may withdraw at any time, and refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits, or reduction in the level of care to which the participant is otherwise entitled
In addition to the required elements listed above, per the G-ACRE-IRB, for research involving the collection of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, one (1) of the following must be included in the informed consent:

A statement that identifiers will be removed from the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens and that, after such removal, the information or biospecimens could be used for future research studies without additional informed consent from the participant or legal representative/guardian
A statement that the participant's information or biospecimens collected as part of the research, even if identifiers are removed, will not be used or distributed for future research studies
See also the Consent for Specimen section for additional information on informed consent relating to specimens.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Overview

As specified in the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines. The G-ACRE-IRB also complies with the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS)’ International Ethical Guidelines for Health-related Research Involving Humans (LBR-2) and the national ethical guidelines for research on human participants. (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.)

As per LBR-8, Liberia’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. LBR-8 and the G-ACRE-IRB state that a participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the G-ACRE-IRB, LBR-8, LBR-33, and LBR-34, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As per the G-ACRE-IRB, LBR-8, LBR-33, and LBR-34, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study. (See the Required Elements section for a more detailed list.)

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per LBR-8 and the G-ACRE-IRB, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The G-ACRE-IRB, LBR-8, LBR-33, and LBR-34, state that the research participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

LBR-8 states that the research participant’s rights, safety, and well-being must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

(See the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.)

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
As set forth in the LibCTReg, in an emergency situation where consent cannot be obtained, treatment which is necessary without delay to save the life of the trial participant can be started immediately. Such situations must be defined by the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) and consent for continued participation must be obtained as soon as possible and not later than as defined by the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) for a given clinical trial.

The LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial further explain that the LMHRA has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines. LBR-8 makes provisions to protect the rights of a research participant during the informed consent process when the procedure is complicated by medical emergencies in which prior consent from the participant is not possible.

As delineated in LBR-8, in an emergency, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) cannot be obtained from the research participant, the consent of the legal representative/guardian should be obtained. If the prior consent of the participant or legal representative/guardian cannot be obtained, the participant’s enrollment should follow measures specified in the protocol, and/or elsewhere, with documented LMHRA approval to protect the rights, safety, and well-being of the participant, and to ensure compliance with ethics committee (EC) and LMHRA requirements. The participant or the participant’s legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial and provide consent as soon as possible.

Per the G-LibClinTrial, examples of emergency situations are epidemics or other urgent public health interests that require fast utilization of new medicines or health products and/or fast gathering of information on products. Information provided to clinical trial participants about the process of obtaining consent must be included in the documents submitted to the LMHRA. Refer to 2.3 of the G-LibClinTrial for additional information on how to submit an expedited clinical trial application package.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Overview

The LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial explain that the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines. According to LBR-8, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process.

LBR-8 explains that vulnerable populations include those participants whose willingness to volunteer in a clinical trial may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation, or of a retaliatory response from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate. Examples may include, but are not limited to, members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students; subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel; employees of the pharmaceutical industry; members of the armed forces; and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable study participants include patients with incurable diseases, persons in nursing homes, unemployed or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.

Persons with Diseases

As indicated in the LibCTReg, in the case of a clinical trial on a person of legal age who is suffering from a disease for which the investigational product (IP) is to be used, one (1) of the following conditions should be applied along with the general clinical trial requirements delineated in the LibCTReg:

The use of the IP is indicated according to the findings of medical science in order to save the person's life
The IP must be of direct benefit to the group of patients who are suffering from the same disease as this person
Persons Under Legal Disability

As set forth in the LibCTReg, “persons under legal disability” are defined as being under the same category as a minor in terms of the individual’s ability to grant consent, except that the person under disability may be above the age of consent (18 years), but may be too ill to participate in decisions regarding their own health. In this case, priority is not given to parents or next of kin to petition the Probate Court for Guardianship, but priority is given to any natural person who demonstrates best interest in the welfare of the disabled.

The LibCTReg further explains that a person under legal disability may participate in a trial, if their parents/legal guardians have be informed of the nature, significance, and implications of the clinical trial and have given a written voluntary informed consent. If the informed implication is grave, it may be necessary for the guardian to secure the permission from the Probate Court before granting consent, due to the fact that the Decree of Guardianship has a clause that the Court appointed guardian should not release the disabled person to any other body in which case their welfare will be put at peril. Otherwise, it can be argued that the appointed guardian has breached their fiduciary duty to the Court by releasing the disabled person to peril.

See the Children/Minors and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
According to the LibCTReg and the G-NREB, Liberia defines children and minors as those persons under 18 years of age. The G-NREB also defines adolescents as those between the ages of 15 and 17.

The LibCTReg also states that the definition of legal guardian or the “legal representative of a minor” is based on the premise that a minor cannot grant consent or enter into an agreement. According to LibCTReg, the interest of a minor must be firstly protected by the parents (the father if the parents are married or the child is legitimized) or the mother of the child if the parents are not married. Where there is no parent alive, especially the mother if the child is not born out of wedlock or legitimized, any next of kin, preferably the grandparents first, the siblings second, or any person with interest in the welfare of the child, may petition the Probate Court for Decree of Guardianship. A guardian must be authorized to give consent for the minor child. No institution can serve as guardian and give consent for research on the child. A guardian must be a natural person, not an institution.

Additionally, per the LibCTReg, a minor may participate in a trial, if their parents/legal guardians have been informed of the nature, significance, and implications of the clinical trial and have given a written voluntary informed consent. If the informed implication is grave, it may be necessary for the guardian to secure the permission from the Probate Court before granting consent, due to the fact that the Decree of Guardianship has a clause that the Court appointed guardian should not release the minor to any other body in which case their welfare will be put at peril. Otherwise, it can be argued that the appointed guardian has breached their fiduciary duty to the Court by releasing the minor or disabled to peril.

Also, as indicated in LibCTReg, in the case of a clinical trial on a minor who suffers or may suffer from a disease for which the investigational product (IP) is to be used, the following conditions should be applied:

The use of the IP must be indicated according to the findings of medical science in order to save the life of the trial participant, to restore the participant to health, to alleviate suffering, or to prevent a disease
The clinical trial must be of direct benefit to the group of patients suffering from the same disease as the trial participant
The research must be absolutely necessary in order to confirm data obtained in clinical trials on other persons or by means of other research methods
The research must relate to a clinical condition from which the minor concerned is suffering or may suffer
The research may cause only minimal risk and minimal burden to the trial participant
LBR-34 also provides a sample National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) informed consent form (ICF) for children that explains the parents’ or guardian’s signatures document their permission for the child to take part in a research study as well as their permission for the use and disclosure of the child’s protected health information. If a second parent’s signature is not obtained, the first parent or guardian needs to choose one (1) of the following options on the form to justify why this is not possible:

The ethics committee (EC) has determined that the permission of one (1) parent is sufficient (this option is only listed on the form if it has been approved by the EC)
Second parent is deceased
Second parent is unknown
Second parent is incompetent
Second parent is not reasonably available
Only one (1) parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child
In addition, an individual may provide permission as a guardian for a child only if that individual can provide a written document indicating that the individual is legally authorized to consent to the child’s general medical care and this documentation must be attached to the signed ICF. LBR-34 indicates that the EC must approve the consent form, a witness must be present during the consent process, and the witness must sign and date the ICF.

LBR-8 further states that when a clinical trial includes minors, the minor should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with his or her understanding and, if capable, the minor should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

As delineated in the G-ACRE-IRB, the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB) must classify research involving children into one (1) of four (4) categories and document its discussion of the risks and benefits of the research study in order to approve such research. The risk/benefit categories are as follows (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the NREB and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.):

When the ACRE IRB determines that the risk is no more than minimal to children in a study, it may approve the research only if adequate provisions are made for soliciting the assent of the children and permission of their parents or legal guardians
When the ACRE IRB determines that more than minimal risk to children is presented by a procedure that indicates the prospect of direct benefit to an individual child, or by a monitoring procedure that is likely to contribute to the child’s well-being, the ACRE IRB may approve the research if it is established that: the risk is justified by the anticipated benefit to the children; the relation of the anticipated benefit to the risk is at least as favorable to the children as that presented by available alternative approaches; and adequate provisions are made for soliciting the assent of the children and permission of their parents or legal guardians
When the ACRE IRB determines that the study presents more than minimal risk to children and does not hold out the prospect of direct benefit for the individual child, but is likely to contribute generalizable knowledge about the child’s disorder or condition, the board may approve the research if it established that: the risk represents a minor increase over minimal risk; the study intervention or procedure presents experiences to participants that are reasonably commensurate with those inherent in their actual or expected medical, dental, psychological, social, or educational situations; the intervention or procedure is likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the participants’ disorder or condition which is of vital importance for the understanding or improvement of the participants’ disorder or condition; and adequate provisions are made for soliciting the assent of the children and permission of their parents or legal guardians
When the ACRE IRB determines that the research does not meet the requirements in any of the above three (3) categories, the board may only approve the research if it finds that the study presents a reasonable opportunity to further the understanding, prevention, or alleviation of a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of children
The G-ACRE-IRB further states that the ACRE IRB should ensure that adequate permissions are made for soliciting the permission of each child’s parent/legal guardian. The following provisions are used depending on the category of research:

Research not involving greater than minimal risk to children: Where parental permission is to be obtained, the ACRE IRB may suggest that the permission of one (1) parent is sufficient for research not involving greater than minimal risk
Research involving greater than minimal risk but presenting the prospect of direct benefit to the individual child: Where parental permission is to be obtained, the board may suggest that the permission of one (1) parent is sufficient for research involving greater than minimal risk but presenting the prospect of direct benefit to the individual participants
Research involving greater than minimal risk and no prospect of direct benefit to the individual child, but likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the child’s disorder or condition: When the research is approved under this category, both parents must give their permission unless one (1) parent is deceased, unknown, incompetent, not reasonably available, or when only one (1) parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child
If the ACRE IRB determines that a research study is designed for a participant population for which approval from the parents and/or legal guardian(s) or representative(s) is not reasonably required to protect the participants (e.g., neglected or abused children), the G-ACRE-IRB indicates that the consent requirements may be waived. In order to protect the rights and welfare of children in a research study, the board should consider the involvement of a court appointed guardian.

Assent Requirements

Per the LibCTReg, an assent form must be signed, and, if possible, dated by the minor. Similarly, per the G-LibClinTrial, when the research participant is a minor, the investigator must obtain assent from the child/minor. The G-NREB also indicates that both written parental consent and assent forms should be completed for children less than 18 years of age. Per LBR-34, the child’s assent should also be attained unless this can be justified by one (1) of the following reasons:

The EC determined that assent of the child was not a requirement
The capability of the child is so limited that the child cannot reasonably be consulted
According to LBR-34, the EC must approve the assent form, a witness must be present during the consent process, and the witness must sign and date the ICF.

In addition, the G-ACRE-IRB explains that adequate provisions for the assent of children include the following:

Children capable of assenting: After the ACRE IRB determines that a child is capable of assenting, the proposed research procedures should be explained to the child in a language that is appropriate to the age, experience, maturity, and condition of the child and should include any discomforts and inconveniences the child may experience if the child agrees to participate in the study
The option to withdraw: As they are in the developmental stage, children should be asked if they do or do not wish to participate in the research, especially where the research does not involve interventions likely to be of benefit to the participants but that they will be volunteers for the benefit of others
The signing of assent or consent: When an assent requirement is established, the investigator or the designee and the child (when appropriate) will sign the study consent form. When it is inappropriate for the child to sign the form (due to age or ability), the board requires that the document be signed by the investigator (or the designee) and the parent/legal guardian
Per the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB may determine that assent may be waived if the capability of some or all of the children is so limited that they cannot reasonably be consulted; or the intervention or procedure involved in the research has a direct benefit to the health or well-being of the children and is available only in the context of the research. In such instances, a child’s dissent which should normally be respected, may be overruled by the child’s parents at the discretion of the board (for example, when a research study involves providing experimental therapies for life-threatening diseases such as Ebola Virus Disease, severe COVID-19, or cancer, parents may wish to try anything to help their children, even with the likelihood of success being uncertain). If the child is a matured adolescent, the child’s wishes should be respected.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
As set forth in the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines.

As stated in the G-ACRE-IRB, for clinical research studies using the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB), pregnant women or fetuses may be involved in research if all the following conditions are met (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.):

Where scientifically appropriate, preclinical studies, including studies on pregnant animals, and clinical studies, including studies on non-pregnant women, have been conducted and provide data for assessing potential risks to pregnant women and fetuses
The risk to the fetus is caused solely by the interventions or procedures considered directly beneficial for the woman or the fetus; or, if there is no such prospect of specific benefit, the risk to the fetus is not greater than minimal and the purpose of the research is for the development of important biomedical knowledge which cannot be obtained by any other means
Any risk is the least possible for achieving the objectives of the research
Consent is obtained in accordance with the informed consent provisions in the G-ACRE-IRB if the research holds out the prospect of direct benefit to a pregnant woman; the prospect of a direct benefit both to the pregnant woman and the fetus, or no prospect of benefit for the woman or the fetus when risk to the fetus is not greater than minimal; and the purpose of the research is the development of important biomedical knowledge that cannot be obtained by any other means
If the research holds the prospect of direct benefit solely to the fetus, then the consent of the pregnant woman and the father is obtained in accordance with the informed consent provisions in the G-ACRE-IRB, except that the father’s consent need not be obtained if he is unable to consent due to unavailability, incompetence, or temporary incapacity, or, the pregnancy resulted from rape or incest (close relationship)
Each person providing consent is fully informed regarding the foreseeable impact of the research on the fetus and/or resultant child
For children who are pregnant, assent and permission are obtained in accordance with the provisions for children indicated in this guideline
No inducements, monetary or otherwise, will be offered to terminate a pregnancy
Individuals engaged in the research will have no part in any decisions as to the timing, method, or procedures used to terminate a pregnancy
Individuals engaged in the research will have no part in determining the viability of a fetus
Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Pursuant to the G-ACRE-IRB, for clinical research studies using the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB), due to the vulnerability of prisoners, research involving prisoners should be reviewed by a fully convened ACRE IRB. (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.) Per the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB may only approve research projects involving prisoners if the research falls under one (1) of the following categories:

Study of possible causes, effects, and processes of incarceration, and of criminal behavior, provided that the study presents no more than minimal risk or inconvenience to the participant
Study of prisons as institutional structures or of prisoners as incarcerated persons, provided that the study presents no more than minimal risk and no more than inconvenience to the participants
Research on conditions particularly affecting prisoners as a class (for example, vaccine trials and other research on Ebola, COVID-19, hepatitis, as well as social and psychological research such as alcoholism, drug addiction, and sexual assaults)
Research on practices that are intended and have the probability of improving the health or well-being of the participants
In addition, per the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB must review research involving prisoners and approve such research only if it finds that:

The risks involved in the research are commensurate with risks that would be accepted by non-prisoner volunteers
Procedures for the selection of participants within the prison are fair to all prisoners, and free of arbitrary interference by prison authorities or prisoners. Other than the investigator’s justification to the ACRE IRB, the use of other procedures, and the selection of control participants from the available prisoner population for a particular research study should be randomly done
The information is presented in a language that is understandable to the participant population
There is adequate assurance that parole boards will not take into account a prisoner’s participation, withdrawal, or lack of participation in the research in making decisions regarding parole, and each prisoner is clearly informed in advance that their participation, withdrawal, or lack of participation in the research will have no effect on his or her parole
The ACRE IRB should ensure that adequate provisions are made where there will be a follow-up examination or care of participants after the end of their participation, considering the variable lengths of individual prisoners’ sentences, and informing participants of this information
Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
As set forth in the LibCTReg, “persons under legal disability” is defined as being under the same category as a minor in terms of the individual’s ability to grant consent, except that the person under disability may be above the age of consent (18 years) even though the person may lack the mental capacity to reason properly and grant consent. In this case, priority is not given to parents or next of kin to petition the Probate Court for Guardianship, but priority is given to any natural person who demonstrates the best interest in the welfare of the disabled.

The LibCTReg further explains that a person under legal disability may participate in a trial, if their parents/legal guardians have be informed of the nature, significance, and implications of the clinical trial and have given a written voluntary informed consent. If the informed implication is grave, it may be necessary for the guardian to secure the permission from the Probate Court before granting consent, due to the fact that the Decree of Guardianship has a clause that the court-appointed guardian should not release the disabled person to any other body in which case their welfare will be put at peril. Otherwise, it can be argued that the appointed guardian has breached their fiduciary duty to the court by releasing the disabled person to peril.

Also, as indicated in LibCTReg, in the case of a clinical trial on a person of legal age who is incapable of comprehending the nature, significance, and implications of a clinical trial and of determining their will in the light of these facts, and who is also suffering from a disease which is to be treated by the investigational product (IP), the following conditions should be applied:

The use of the IP must be indicated, according to the findings of medical science, in order to save the life of the trial participant, to restore the participant to health or to alleviate suffering
The research must relate directly to a life-threatening or highly debilitating clinical condition suffered by the trial participant and the clinical trial may involve as little burden and other foreseeable risks as possible for the trial participant. Both the degree of burden and the risk threshold must be defined specifically in the trial protocol and monitored constantly by the investigator. The clinical trial may only be conducted if there is a justified expectation that the benefits of using the IP for the trial participant outweigh the risks
Consent should be given by the legal representative/guardian after participant has been duly informed per the general clinical trial requirements in LibCTReg
The research must be absolutely necessary for the confirmation of data obtained from clinical trials conducted on persons capable of granting informed consent or by means of other research methods
With the exception of adequate compensation, no advantages may be granted
Additionally, as per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines.

LBR-34 provides a sample National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) informed consent form (ICF) for adults unable to consent, which explains that the signature of the legally authorized representative documents their permission for the participant named in the ICF to take part in this research study, as well as their permission for the use and disclosure of the participant’s protected health information. The participant’s assent should also be attained unless this can be justified by one (1) of the following reasons:

The EC determined that assent of the participant was not a requirement
The capability of the participant is so limited that the participant cannot reasonably be consulted
The previously listed options are only available if they have been approved by the EC. A witness must also be present during the consent process and the witness must sign and date the ICF.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines.

As delineated in LibCTReg and LBR-8, an investigational product (IP) is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes a product with a marketing authorization when it is used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form, when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use. In Liberia, IPs are referred to as investigational medicinal products (IMPs).

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Manufacturing

As set forth in the LMHRA-Act, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) is responsible for issuing licenses or permits for premises and personnel to engage in the manufacture of medicinal products in Liberia. The LibCTReg also states that investigational products (IPs) for clinical trials must be manufactured according to internationally accepted good manufacturing practice (GMP) principles.

Per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the LMHRA has also adopted the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)'s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines. LBR-8 notes that the sponsor should ensure an IP including the active comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable, is characterized as appropriate to the IP’s stage of development and is manufactured in accordance with applicable GMP. Per LBR-29, the World Health Organization’s (WHO) GMP Guidelines for IPs (LBR-26) and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) Harmonised Tripartite GMP Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (LBR-9) must also be complied with during the IP manufacturing process.

As explained in G-Inspec-PMS, where pharmaceutical factories have not yet established validated manufacturing processes for pharmaceuticals for use in clinical trials, or have not yet established comprehensive manufacturing control standards, the factories must establish written operational procedures and keep detailed and accurate records for each batch of products manufactured, and each batch of raw material used. Batch manufacturing records must be kept until clinical trials are completed, or until at least two (2) years after the product is completed, whichever period is longer. Additionally, where pharmaceutical factories produce biopharmaceuticals or biotechnology products for use in clinical trials, impurities caused by virus inactivation/removal or other organisms may not exceed the limits imposed on other similar products on the market; where operational procedures for said products have not yet been validated, quality control tests must be performed.

Import

As set forth in the LMHRA-Act, the LMHRA is also responsible for issuing licenses or permits for the import/export of medicinal products in Liberia. Pursuant to the G-Inspec-PMS, authorization must be obtained from the LMHRA for the importation of medicines to be used in clinical trials. Per LBR-30, the Clinical Trials Unit within the LMHRA’s Pharmacovigilance & Clinical Trials Department is responsible for reviewing importation permits for IPs that are required for the conduct of clinical trials. Per LBR-5, the department is also responsible for receiving IP application submissions in Liberia and coordinating with the LMHRA’s Clinical Trial Team to ensure the safety and efficacy of the IPs to be used in clinical trials.

According to LBR-5, the IP dossier documentation requirements for the LMHRA’s approval are as follows:

Submit typewritten application as per G-LibClinTrial
Pay the required fee into the LMHRA bank account
Submit payment slip to the Finance Department to obtain an official LMHRA receipt
Present the IP dossier(s) along with the official receipt and product samples to the LMHRA
The G-LibClinTrial further explains that if the IP(s), health products, or any auxiliary medicinal product must be imported, the clinical trial must be approved by the LMHRA before the import can be authorized. IPs may only be imported if they are not locally available or if the need for importation is otherwise justified. The justification must be stated in the import permit application letter.

Per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the import permit application must contain the following information and documentation:

Name and address of the sponsor, the sponsor’s legal representative, or the sponsor-investigator (both physical and postal)
Principal investigator’s name, address (both physical and postal), and contact details (e.g., phone number and email)
The clinical trial for which the application is made
The planned clinical trial sites and the planned number of participants at the sites
IP(s) description by name or code, strength, and dosage form
IP(s) unit of issue, total quantity, batch number, manufacture, and expiry dates
Sample labels of the primary and secondary containers
Planned return of unused IP(s) to sponsor or destruction at the clinical trial site
The LibCTReg also notes that an application letter should be sent to the LMHRA Managing Director along with the required documentation.

In addition, per G-LibClinTrial, a parallel submission for approval of the clinical trial and the import permit application is possible. In this case, the import permit application can be included in the clinical trial application package.

Please note: Liberia is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (LBR-3), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see LBR-17.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

Per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines. Per the LBR-8, the sponsor should also update the investigator’s brochure (IB) as significant new information becomes available.

As specified in the LBR-8, the IB must provide coverage of the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties
Pharmaceutical aspects
Pharmacokinetics and metabolism
Toxicological effects in any animal species tested under a single dose study, a repeated dose study, or a special study
Results of clinical pharmacokinetic studies
Information regarding safety, pharmacodynamics, efficacy, adverse events data, and dose responses obtained from prior clinical trials in humans
See the LBR-8 for additional details regarding the IB.

Quality Management

Per the G-LibClinTrial, the Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) certificate issued from the national regulatory authority of the country where the investigational product (IP) is manufactured must be included in the clinical trial application submission package, if applicable. If necessary, the certificate must be translated to English.

According to LBR-29, the sponsor or the representative must also ensure that the products are manufactured in accordance with the WHO’s GMP Guidelines for Investigational Products (LBR-26) and the ICH Harmonised Tripartite Good Manufacturing Practice Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (LBR-9).

Per LBR-8, the sponsor must maintain a Certificate of Analysis to document the identity, purity, and strength of the IP(s) to be used in the clinical trial.

(See Product Management section for additional information on sponsor requirements).

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Liberia must comply with the requirements set forth in the LibCTReg, the G-LibClinTrial, and the G-Inspec-PMS. While there is no specified language requirement for IP labeling, English appears to be the preferred language. (Note: IPs are also referred to as investigational medicinal products (IMPs)). Per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines.

The LibCTReg specifies that IPs to be used in a clinical trial center must be properly labelled and the package must sufficiently identify the following:

The clinical trial to be carried out
The medicine(s) to be used
The trial participant identification number to whom the medicine is to be administered
The name and address of the site where the clinical trial is conducted
The directions in regard to the manner in which such medicine should be used
The date of dispensing, if applicable
The storage conditions
The use-by, expiry, or re-test date, as applicable
The reference number, as applicable
Any other information as may be required by the LMHRA
As delineated in the G-LibClinTrial, if the primary container takes the form of blister packs or small units such as ampoules, the secondary packaging should be provided bearing a label with the required particulars. However, the primary container should bear the following information:

Name of the sponsor, contract research organization (CRO), or investigator
Route of administration (may be excluded for oral solid dosage forms) and in the case of open trials, the name/identifier of the IP and strength/potency
Batch and/or code number to identify the contents and packaging operation
A trial reference code allowing identification of the trial, site, investigator, and sponsor if not given elsewhere
The trial participant identification number/treatment number and where relevant, the visit number
In addition, the G-LibClinTrial explains that if it becomes necessary to change the expiry/use-by date, an additional label should be affixed to the IP which should state the new use-by date and repeat the batch number. It may be superimposed on the old date, but for quality control reasons, not on the original batch number. The operation should be performed at an appropriately authorized manufacturing site. However, when justified, the operation may be performed at the investigational site by or under the supervision of the clinical trial site pharmacist (if available), the principal investigator, or the clinical trial monitor(s), who should be appropriately trained. The provisions listed above may apply for auxiliary medicinal products. An auxiliary medicinal product is a medicinal product used for the needs of a clinical trial as described in the protocol, but not as an IP (e.g., medicinal products used as rescue medication, challenge agents, to assess endpoints in the clinical trial, or background treatment).

As explained in the G-Inspec-PMS, where pharmaceutical factories produce pharmaceuticals for use in clinical trials, the IPs must also be labeled “for use in clinical trials only” and marked with the name of the party that commissioned the clinical trial and a trial code sufficient to identify the trial location and the research personnel involved. However, where pharmaceuticals for use in clinical trials are tested in closed trials (double-blind trials), drug name, potency, and efficacy may be replaced by product codes, serial numbers, and packaging batch numbers.

LBR-8 states that the IP must be coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable, and comply with applicable regulatory requirements. The IPs must also be suitably packaged in a manner that will prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

Per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)'s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) for use along with the LMHRA guidelines. According to LBR-29, the World Health Organization's (WHO) Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Guidelines for Investigational Products (IPs) (LBR-26) and the ICH Harmonised Tripartite Good Manufacturing Practice Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (LBR-9) must also be complied with during IP product management. In addition, per the LMHRA-Act, the LMHRA is responsible for the supply and storage of medicinal products in Liberia. See LBR-26 and LBR-9 for details.

The LibCTReg specifies that it is the responsibility of the sponsor to supply IPs (also referred to as investigational medicinal products (IMPs)) produced in compliance with internationally accepted GMP principles. According to LBR-8, the sponsor or the representative must also supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the IPs. The sponsor or the representative should not supply either party with the IP(s) until all the required documentation is obtained. In this case, per the LMHRA-Act, the LMHRA approval license/permit is the required documentation. Per LBR-8, the IPs should be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable GMP and the sponsor must ensure that the written procedures include instructions that the investigator/institution should follow for the handling and storage of IP(s) for the trial and documentation thereof. The procedures should address adequate and safe receipt, handling, storage, dispensing, retrieval of unused product from participants, and return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor (or alternative disposition if authorized by the sponsor and in compliance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s)). The sponsor must also ensure the timely delivery of the IP(s).

LBR-8 specifies that the sponsor should determine acceptable storage temperatures, storage conditions (e.g., protection from light), storage times, reconstitution fluids and procedures, and devices for product infusion for the IPs, if any. The sponsor should inform all involved parties (e.g., monitors, investigators, pharmacists, storage managers) of these determinations. Further, the sponsor should also take steps to ensure that the IPs are stable for the period of use and maintain sufficient quantities of IPs to reconfirm specifications, and if necessary, maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics. To the extent stability permits, samples should be retained either until the trial data analyses are complete, or as required by the applicable regulatory requirements, whichever represents the longer retention period. Refer to LBR-8 for detailed, sponsor-related IP requirements.

The LibCTReg further specifies that destruction operations for IPs should be carried out in such a manner that all operations may be accounted for. Documentation should clearly identify, or allow traceability to, the batches and/or trial participant numbers involved and the actual quantities destroyed. The G-LibClinTrial also states that if the IP(s), health product(s), or auxiliary medicine(s) used in a clinical trial are to be destroyed at any point in time, a respective destruction procedure must be provided to the LMHRA as part of the clinical trial protocol. The sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) must bear the cost of the disposal.

As per the LibCTReg, if the sponsor or sponsor-investigator would like to export the IP(s) remaining after the clinical trial has been stopped or completed, the sponsor, the legal representative, or the sponsor-investigator must obtain an export authorization from the LMHRA.

Per the G-Inspec-PMS, pharmaceutical factories must determine a suitable expiration date for pharmaceuticals for use in clinical trials based on the product properties, container characteristics, and storage conditions. See the G-Inspec-PMS for additional information.

Record Requirements

Per LBR-8, the sponsor must ensure the following:

Maintain records that document IP(s) shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction
Maintain a system for retrieving IPs and documenting this retrieval
Maintain a system for the disposition of unused IP(s) and for the documentation of this disposition
LBR-8 also specifies that the investigator/institution and/or a pharmacist, or other appropriate individual who is designated by the investigator/institution, should maintain records of the IP's delivery to the trial site, the inventory at the site, the use by each participant, and the return to the sponsor or alternative disposition of unused product(s). These records should include dates, quantities, batch/serial numbers, expiration dates (if applicable), and the unique code numbers assigned to the IP(s) and trial participants. Investigators should maintain records that document adequately that the participants were provided the doses specified by the protocol and reconcile all IP(s) received from the sponsor.

In addition, per LBR-8, sponsor-specific essential documents should also be retained until at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application, until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications, or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of the IP’s clinical development.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
While the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) does not provide a formal definition for specimens, the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB) describes examples of specimens in the G-ACRE-IRB. As per the G-ACRE-IRB, examples of biological specimens include:

Collection of blood via finger or ear stick
Hair and nail clippings collected in a non-disfiguring manner
Excreta and external secretions (including sweat)
Sputum collected through expectoration
Bodily fluids
Tissue biopsies
Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Import

Information is unavailable regarding the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA)’s role in approving the import of biological specimens.

Export

As set forth in the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, the applicant must obtain an authorization from the LMHRA if biological samples are to be exported out of Liberia. Additionally, per the LibCTReg and G-LibClinTrial, the applicant must provide an annual progress report on the use and results obtained from the biological samples exported out of Liberia. Pursuant to Part VIII of the LMHRA-Act, the LibCTReg also states that any person(s), institution(s), corporate entity(ies), their designees or legal representatives who is found in violation of any provision of the biological sample export requirements delineated in LibCTReg will be liable to fines as prescribed by the LMHRA at the time of commission.

Material Transfer Agreement

Per the LibCTReg and the G-LibClinTrial, a material transfer agreement (MTA) must also be provided to the LMHRA. The G-LibClinTrial notes that the authorization request and the MTA should be included in the clinical trial application submission package.

The G-NREB indicates that the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) requires the MTA process be used for the shipment of specimens/biological materials outside of Liberia. The G-NREB also specifies that when a protocol application is submitted for review by the NREB, the accompanying documentation should also include an MTA for the shipment of the specimen/biological materials outside of Liberia (where applicable).

According to the G-ACRE-IRB, the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB) requires the MTA process be used for the shipment of specimens/biological materials outside of Liberia. The G-ACRE-IRB further explains that the purpose of an MTA is to protect the interests of local researchers and Liberia’s human and natural resources in all its biodiversity and how they can be legitimately used. It ensures that the interests of all relevant parties are protected from exploitation and egregious harm. (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the NREB and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.)

Per the G-ACRE-IRB, for studies using the ACRE IRB, the MTA must detail the type of materials, anticipated use, location of storage outside Liberia, duration of such storage, and limitations on use, transfer, and termination of use of such materials subject to any laws, regulations, and enactments in Liberia.

In addition, per the G-ACRE-IRB, the ACRE IRB requires an MTA be signed by all parties involved in the research including local and international principal investigators, heads of local institutions, research sponsors, and other relevant entities prior to the transfer or export of biological samples out of Liberia. The MTA must detail the type of materials, anticipated use, location of storage outside Liberia, duration of such storage, limitations on use, transfer, and termination of use of such materials, subject to any laws, regulations, and enactments in Liberia. The following requirements must also be met:

The ACRE IRB (the provider institution) must review the MTA to ensure consistency with the stated objectives of the research, the contents of the informed consent documents, and the principles stated in the G-ACRE-IRB. The ACRE IRB must grant provisional approval pending the submission of the MTA to the ethics committee (EC) (the recipient institution) and the EC’s receipt of acknowledgement
The applicant for research review (the scientist or sponsor at the provider institution) must file a copy of the MTA and provisional approval by the ACRE IRB (the provider institution) with the EC (the recipient institution) for record purposes only
The EC (the recipient institution) must acknowledge receipt of the MTA to the applicant (the scientist or sponsor at the provider institution) who must inform the ACRE IRB (the provider institution)
The ACRE IRB (the provider institution) is required to grant final approval to research involving international transfer of Liberian samples after all the other stated criteria have been met and upon acknowledgement of MTA receipt
Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: February 4, 2025
Detailed information is unavailable regarding the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA)’s requirements for obtaining informed consent from participants prior to collecting, storing, or using their biological sample(s). Additionally, no applicable requirements are available regarding the National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB)’s requirements for obtaining participant informed consent prior to collecting, storing, or using their biological sample(s).

However, the G-ACRE-IRB notes that for studies using the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB), the Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) does not invalidate the right of research participants or communities to request that their samples be withdrawn from research according to the terms of the informed consent process. (Note: Per LBR-28, due to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the NREB and the ACRE IRB in 2022, the ACRE IRB does not review and approve clinical trial protocols. All clinical trial protocols submitted to the ACRE IRB are referred to the NREB.)

As delineated in the G-ACRE-IRB, the following information must be provided for the ACRE IRB’s review of a research protocol involving specimens:

A full description of any specimens that will be collected (blood, bodily fluids, tissue biopsies, etc.)
Plans for obtaining consent and clearance from participants and the ACRE IRB, for long-term storage, export, and future research
Arrangements for transfer and disposal
Community considerations
The impact and relevance of the research on the local community from where the research participants are recruited as well as the wider communities and the environment of concern
The consultation procedures with the concerned communities at the time of the planning and designing of the research
The influence of the community on the consent of the research participants/individuals
Proposed community consultation during the course of the research
The extent to which the research contributes to capacity-building, such as the improvement of local healthcare, research, and the ability to respond to public health needs
Description of how the research results will be made available to the research participants and the concerned communities
Pursuant to the G-ACRE-IRB, for research that involves the collection of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, one (1) of the following must be included in the informed consent:

A statement that identifiers will be removed from the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens and that, after such removal, the information or biospecimens could be used for future research studies without additional informed consent from the participant or legal representative/guardian; or
A statement that the participant's information or biospecimens collected as part of the research, even if identifiers are removed, will not be used or distributed for future research studies
See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent.

Requirements
(Legislation) An Act to Establish the Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority of 2010 (LMHRA-Act) (September 29, 2010)
Senate and House of Representatives of the Republic of Liberia
(Legislation) Penal Law - Title 26 - Liberian Code of Laws Revised (PenalLaw) (April 3, 1978)
Legislature of the Republic of Liberia
(Regulation) Regulations on Clinical Trials (LibCTReg) (Version No. 01) (February 2022)
Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines for Rapid Clinical Trials Review and Processes During Public Health Emergencies in Liberia (G-CTEmergncy) (October 31, 2024)
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia
(Guidance) Guideline for the Pharmacovigilance System in Liberia (G-LibPV) (March 2013)
Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines for Inspectorate & Post Market Surveillance (G-Inspec-PMS) (Version No. 001) (January 2021)
Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines on the Conduct of Clinical Trials in Liberia (G-LibClinTrial) (Version No. 002) (Effective August 20, 2021)
Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Operational Guidelines (Amended Version 2019) National Research Ethics Board of Liberia (NREB) Republic of Liberia (G-NREB) (Amended 2019)
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia
(Guidance) Policies and Procedures Handbook (G-ACRE-IRB) (December 2022)
Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board
(Policy) National Research for Health Policy and Strategy: 2018-2023 (NatResHlthPlcy) (2018)
Ministry of Health
Additional Resources
(Document) African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF) - Clinical Trial Application Checklist (LBR-1) (Version 2) (October 2019)
African Vaccine Regulatory Forum, World Health Organization
(Document) LMHRA Clinical Trial Fees Schedule (LBR-39) (Date Unavailable)
Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (LBR-3) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for the Submission of Dossiers for Investigational Products (LBR-5) (Date Unavailable)
Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Document) The Belmont Report: Ethical Principals and Guidelines for the Protection of Human Subjects of Research (LBR-11) (September 30, 1978)
National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (LBR-27) (December 13, 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Good Manufacturing Practices: Supplementary Guidelines for the Manufacture of Investigational Pharmaceutical Products for Clinical Trials in Humans (Technical Report Series No. 863, Annex 7) (LBR-26) (1996)
World Health Organization
(International Guidance) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (LBR-25) (Technical Report Series No. 850, Annex 3) (1995)
World Health Organization
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (LBR-8) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) Harmonised Tripartite Good Manufacturing Practice Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (Q7) (LBR-9) (Step 4 Version) (November 10, 2000)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) International Ethical Guidelines for Health-related Research Involving Humans (LBR-2) (2016)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS)
(International Guidance) Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (LBR-37) (Step 4 Version) (November 1995)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority (LMHRA) (December 2024) (LBR-29)
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with the Atlantic Center for Research and Evaluation Institutional Review Board (ACRE IRB) (November 2024) (LBR-28)
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with the National Research Ethics Board (NREB) (November 2024) (LBR-38)
(Webpage) African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF) Overview (LBR-4) (Current as of February 4, 2025)
African Vaccine Regulatory Forum, World Health Organization
(Webpage) Clinical Trials - Clinical Trial Unit (LBR-30) (Current as of February 4, 2025)
Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) ClinicalTrials.gov (LBR-40) (Current as of February 4, 2025)
National Library of Medicine
(Webpage) Country Profile: Liberia (LBR-17) (Current as of February 4, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) LMHRA - Contact (LBR-19) (Current as of February 4, 2025)
Liberia Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) National Research Ethics Board of Liberia - Mission - Vision (LBR-12) (Current as of February 4, 2025)
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia
(Webpage) National Research Ethics Board of Liberia - Organization Structure (LBR-18) (Current as of February 4, 2025)
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia
(Webpage) National Research Ethics Board of Liberia - Review Criteria (LBR-31) (Current as of February 4, 2025)
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia
(Webpage) National Research Ethics Board of Liberia - Review Guidelines (LBR-23) (Current as of February 4, 2025)
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia
(Webpage) National Research Ethics Board of Liberia - Review Process (LBR-20) (Current as of February 4, 2025)
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia
(Webpage) Pan African Clinical Trial Registry (PACTR) (LBR-36) (Current as of February 4, 2025)
Pan African Clinical Trial Registry
(Webpage) Primary Registries in the WHO Registry Network (LBR-35) (Current as of February 4, 2025)
World Health Organization
Forms
(Form) NREB Continuing Review and Study Progress Report (LBR-24) (Version 1.0) (Date Unavailable)
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia
(Form) NREB Continuing Review Form (LBR-6) (Version 1.0) (Date Unavailable)
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia
(Form) NREB Exempt Human Research Consent Script Form (LBR-33) (Version 1.0) (Date Unavailable)
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia
(Form) NREB Research Protocol Template (LBR-32) (Version 1.0) (Date Unavailable)
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia
(Form) NREB Short Consent Template (LBR-34) (Version 1.0) (Date Unavailable)
National Research Ethics Board of Liberia
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Malawi
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
Unspecified
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
No
Clinical trial registration required
No
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
Yes
Age of minors
Under 18
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Clinical research in Malawi is regulated and overseen by the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) and the National Commission for Science and Technology (NCST).

Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority

As per the PMRAAct, the PMRA is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial approvals, oversight, and inspections in Malawi. In accordance with the PMRAAct, the PMRA replaced the Pharmacy, Medicines and Poisons Board (PMPB) in 2019. (Note: Some sources in this profile were issued prior to the name change and still reference PMPB).

According to the PMRAAct, the Ministry of Health (MOH) established and manages the PMRA, which is overseen by the Minister of Health. The MOH grants authority to PMRA to monitor the registration and quality of drugs in Malawi. The PMRA is composed of part-time members appointed by the Minister. See MWI-49 for a list of the current PMRA Board of Directors. Per MWI-47, the PMRA regulates clinical trials and issues import and export permits. MWI-36 specifies that the Clinical Trial Review Committee (CTRC), a sub-committee of the Medicines Committee, advises the PMRA on matters related to authorization and monitoring of clinical trials.

As indicated in MWI-39, the Research Division of the Public Health Institute of Malawi is responsible for promoting and coordinating all public health-related research in the country. The Division also takes a lead role in implementing all research activities in the MOH, and includes four key sections: Human Subject Protection, Research Science, Capacity Building, and Knowledge Management.

National Commission for Science and Technology

The SciTechAct and MWI-24 indicate that the NCST appraises, reviews, monitors, and evaluates priority research and development programs, plans, and projects of research and development institutions. The NCST also encourages the use of local expertise in science and technology matters via a set of professional standards, ethics, and guidelines.

As stated in the SciTechOrder, an NCST-issued license is required for research activities involving humans; research involving clinical trials; research activities of multicentered research; the collection, storage, and use of human samples for research; the accreditation of research institutions; and the establishment of an institutional research ethics committee (EC). Additionally, per MWI-26, research conducted in Malawi is approved through the NCST’s established and recognized ECs, which include the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) and the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC). The SciTechOrder does not specify whether the process of obtaining an NCST-issued license is separate from the NHSRC and COMREC approvals.

For detailed information on the NCST composition and responsibilities, see the SciTechAct, the SciTechOrder, MWI-24, MWI-26, MWI-37, and MWI-38.

Other Considerations

Please note: Malawi is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (MWI-3), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see MWI-35.

Contact Information

Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority

As per MWI-46, the PMRA contact information is as follows:

Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
Off Paul Kagame Road, Area 5
P.O. Box 30241
Lilongwe 3, Malawi

Phone: +265 212 755 165 or +265 212 750 108
Email: info@pmra.mw

National Commission for Science and Technology

Per MWI-57, the NCST contact information is as follows:

Mailing Address:
National Commission for Science and Technology
1st Floor Lingadzi House, Robert Mugabe Crescent
Private Bag B303
Lilongwe 3, Malawi

Phone: +265 1 771 550
Email: infor@ncst.mw

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the PMRAAct, the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) is responsible for reviewing and approving clinical trial applications for new drugs, generic drugs, and imported drugs to be registered in Malawi.

The R-HlthResCoord indicates that before submitting a clinical trial application to the PMRA, the sponsor or principal investigator (PI) must obtain full ethical approval from either of the two (2) National Commission for Science and Technology (NCST)-approved ethics committees (ECs)—the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) or the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC). Parallel submissions of a clinical trial application to an EC and the PMRA are prohibited.

As per the SciTechOrder, an NCST-issued license is required for research activities involving humans; research involving clinical trials; and research activities of multicentered research. The SciTechOrder does not specify whether the process of obtaining an NCST-issued license is separate from the NHSRC and COMREC approvals. See the Scope of Review section for information on NHSRC and COMREC approvals of the aforementioned research activities.

Clinical Trial Review Process

According to MWI-50, the PMRA receives clinical trial applications through the office of the Director General, and the applicant must submit evidence of ethical clearance from either the NHSRC or COMREC.

Per MWI-34, the guidance in the G-CTARevVacBiol and the G-CTAProcsVacBiol also apply to clinical trials of drugs. The G-CTARevVacBiol and the G-CTAProcsVacBiol indicate that upon receipt of a clinical trial application, the PMRA initially screens the application for completeness and assigns a PMRA reference number to the application. According to the G-CTARevVacBiol, the result of the screening will be communicated, and the screening form will be forwarded by fax, to the applicant. The applicant will forward any outstanding documents to the PMRA. The PMRA’s technical staff then reviews the application or may forward it to an expert, or to an evaluator for scientific review.

The G-CTAProcsVacBiol specifies that the application is evaluated by three (3) PMRA-appointed expert clinical trial reviewers who will provide a written report to the designated registration office, also known as the “Focal Point” division. The Focal Point will then collate and present the expert reviews to the PMRA Clinical Trial Review Committee (CTRC). The CTRC then reviews all the available documentation and provides a recommendation for approval or rejection. The PMRA considers the CTRC’s recommendation and issues a written approval or rejection.

MWI-50 further specifies that the PMRA may grant full or conditional approval depending on the nature of the CTRC’s findings. Depending on the study’s risk profile, the PMRA may conduct post-authorization good clinical practice (GCP) inspections for select clinical trials. Per the G-CTARevVacBiol, if the application is neither approved nor rejected, the PMRA’s technical staff will communicate its recommendation to the applicant. The response from the applicant will be considered at the PMRA’s subsequent scheduled meeting, and the subsequent decision will be communicated to the applicant. If changes must be made to the protocol, investigator’s brochure, or any other document, the amended document should be submitted with the applicant’s response.

The G-CTAProcsVacBiol states that the applicant may appeal a rejection decision, providing additional information, or amending the application to meet the PMRA’s requirements. The appeal will be referred to the CTRC for a final recommendation to the PMRA.

Per MWI-61, the PMRA may conduct GCP inspections during ongoing clinical trials to provide real-time assessment of the investigator’s conduct of the trial and protection of participants. Clinical trial sites may be inspected before regulatory approval, while the trial is ongoing, when participants are being enrolled in a trial, on a routine basis, when triggered by a complaint, or if there is a suspicion of serious non-compliance integrity issues and/or scientific/ethical misconduct. See MWI-61 for more information.

(See the Submission Process and Timeline of Review sections for details on the administrative and technical processing and review timelines. See also the G-CTARevVacBiol and the G-CTAProcsVacBiol for more information on the PMRA’s review procedures.)

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority

According to the PMRAAct, a person who intends to conduct a clinical trial must apply to the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) for a clinical trial certificate upon payment of the prescribed fee.

Per the PMRAFeesRegs, the following fees apply to clinical trials:

Application, review, and registration: 5% of total budget
Annual renewal: $2,200 USD
Amendments: $300 USD
As delineated in the PMRAFeesRegs, a fee equaling 6% of the total invoice value must also be paid for the importation of unregistered medicines or allied substances from authorized sources. The G-ImpExpMP further indicates that this fee is subject to change from time to time.

Payment Instructions

No information is available regarding payment instructions.

National Commission for Science and Technology

No information is available regarding fees for the National Commission for Science and Technology (NCST).

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Overview

Malawi has a centralized registration process for ethics committees (ECs) and EC review. As mandated by the SciTechAct, the National Commission for Science and Technology (NCST) is the governmental body responsible for EC oversight, and for the promotion and coordination of research in Malawi.

As per the G-NHSRC, the G-COMREC, and MWI-50, the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) and the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC) are the two (2) NCST-approved ECs responsible for monitoring and evaluating health research studies involving humans. Per the R-HlthResCoord, each EC has members representing the other committee in order to facilitate the transfer of information between the ECs. The NHSRC and COMREC report to and are centrally monitored by the NCST.

National Health Sciences Research Committee

The G-HlthResConduct and the R-HlthResCoord indicate that the NHSRC has the sole jurisdiction to review studies with a national interest and multicenter studies, as well as studies from all other researchers and institutions. As described in MWI-63, the NHSRC’s mandate is to promote, support, coordinate, and regulate research and development in the fields of infectious diseases, health systems, reproductive health, environmental health, nutrition, non-communicable diseases, social and behavioral research, trauma and rehabilitation, mental health, and other health related areas. It is responsible for the following functions in clinical trial regulations and authorizing/overseeing clinical trials:

Develop and review procedures, guidelines, and standards for the conduct of health-related research in Malawi
Advise the Malawian Government, including the Ministry of Health (MOH), on all scientific and ethical aspects of health-related research
Review and clear all research protocols in health and biomedical sciences fields, except those under COMREC’s jurisdiction
Offer guidance, in relation to each protocol, on the balance between the use of laboratories and expertise outside the country, and the import of techniques and equipment (including personnel) into the country upholding that all research specimens and materials must not be exported without permission from the NHSRC
Review and clear on behalf of the Malawian Government all materials originating from health-related research which is intended for publication within and outside Malawi except where these have already been cleared by COMREC
Offer a platform for the dissemination of health-related research results and exchange of best practices and experiences in health-related research
College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee

The G-HlthResConduct and the R-HlthResCoord indicate that COMREC, as a subsidiary of the NHSRC, only reviews and approves studies involving or originating from College of Medicine (COM) or Kamuzu College of Nursing (KCN) (now known collectively as the Kamuzu University of Health Sciences (KUHeS), per MWI-62) faculty members and students, and their collaborators/coinvestigators/affiliates. Per MWI-40, COMREC’s functions include protecting the safety of human research participants by determining that the proposed research is both scientifically and ethically sound. COMREC’s responsibilities include the following:

Review and approve the science and ethics of proposed research and amendments to previously approved protocols
Annual continuing reviews of approved studies running for more than one (1) year
Follow the progress of studies until the termination of the research
Monitor and report to institutional or regulatory authorities any serious or continuing non-compliance with ethical standards
Recommend suspension or termination of approval of research not conducted in accordance with guidelines or that has been associated with unexpected serious harm to participants
As indicated in MWI-41, KUHeS is in the process of establishing the Kamuzu University of Health Sciences Research Committee (KUREC) to continue COMREC functions. The KUREC establishment is yet to be approved by the NCST. According to MWI-25, the COMREC guidance and forms provided in the Malawi profile are still being used. For more information including support services, see MWI-41.

Ethics Committee Composition

National Health Sciences Research Committee

As per the G-NHSRC, NHSRC must consist of members with varying backgrounds, including the social sciences, to promote complete and adequate research proposal review. The committee should include one (1) lay person, as well as members from the following organizations:

National Research Council of Malawi (one (1) member)
MOH headquarters (two (2) members)
COMREC (two (2) members)
Community Health Sciences Unit (one (1) member)
National AIDS Commission (one (1) member)
Center for Social Research (one (1) member)
Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital (one (1) member)
Zomba Central Hospital (one (1) member)
Lilongwe Central Hospital (one (1) member)
Christian Health Association of Malawi (one (1) member)
Mzuzu University (one (1) member)
Mzuzu Central Hospital (one (1) member)
Nurses and Midwives Council of Malawi (one (1) member)
Ministry of Justice (one (1) member)
The members elect the chairperson and the vice-chairperson.

College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee

The G-COMREC specifies that COMREC should be multidisciplinary, and its members must have the basic qualifications, experience, and expertise to conduct fair scientific and ethical proposal reviews. The committee must have a maximum membership of 15, and include representatives from the biomedical sciences, research methods, behavioral science, and research ethics areas. Additionally, there must also be representatives from the NCST, the NHSRC, the KCN, and the lay community.

Furthermore, the committee must be diverse, have balanced gender representation, and embody community interests and concerns. Members are also required to sign a confidentiality agreement and refuse projects in which they have a conflict of interest. Members from the COM staff serving on the committee must be a minimum grade of senior lecturer, and preferably have peer reviewed publications.

See the G-NHSRC and the G-COMREC for additional EC membership criteria and qualification requirements.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

National Health Sciences Research Committee

The G-NHSRC states that the MOH’s Research Unit serves as a secretariat for NHSRC, and is responsible for preparing materials and meeting logistics. Research proposals must be distributed to NHSRC members two (2) weeks before the scheduled meetings to allow members time to adequately review the submitted proposals. Half of the NHSRC’s membership constitutes a quorum of any meeting, and the meeting is rescheduled within the following two (2) weeks if a quorum is not reached. Half of the ordinary quorum forms a quorum for the rescheduled meeting if no ordinary quorum is reached. Otherwise, the meeting must be rescheduled.

As delineated by the G-NHSRC, NHSRC decisions are reached by consensus. If there is no consensus, a decision is made by simple majority of members present through an open ballot. In the event of a tie, the chairperson casts a vote.

According to the G-NHSRC, when new NHSRC members have been appointed, they may attend the first one (1) or two (2) meetings as an observer in order to learn about the workings of the NHSRC before being assigned reviewer responsibility. Such members will undergo NHSRC orientation sessions covering guidelines and standard operating procedures (SOPs) of the committee and any practical matters with the secretariat and chairperson. Continuing education for all members in matters of health research ethics and related disciplines in human research protections is also essential, and the chairperson is responsible for fostering local and international networks, links, and partnerships for the purposes of continuing the NHSRC’s education and development.

Per the G-NHSRC, NHSRC members must serve on the committee for three (3) years and are required to renew their appointments if requested by their organizations. The G-NHSRC and the G-HlthResConduct also indicate that the NHSRC meets once every two (2) months.

College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee

COMREC requires written SOPs to be maintained, and all relevant records (e.g., SOPs, reports, curriculum vitaes (CVs), meeting minutes, and correspondence) to be archived for three (3) years following the study’s completion, as delineated in the G-COMREC. The COMREC secretariat must compile all the relevant documents and materials required for review of a proposal and circulate them to the members at least 14 days before the date of the scheduled meeting. Quorum of any meeting is achieved when a majority of the members attend. The quorum should preferably include members of both genders, a member whose primary area of expertise is in a non-scientific area, and at least one (1) member who is independent of the COM. If the quorum cannot be achieved, the meeting must be rescheduled within two (2) weeks of the failed meeting. If the subsequent meeting does not achieve quorum, then the chairperson must make a decision based on the expertise and number of members present.

The G-COMREC further states that COMREC’s final decision will be reached through a consensus. If there is no consensus, a decision is made through a majority vote.

Per the G-COMREC, COMREC members must receive initial and continuing training regarding the ethics and science of research. The appointment of committee members is valid for three (3) years, and a member may be reappointed to serve another three (3) year term. According to the G-COMREC and the G-HlthResConduct, COMREC meets every month. To see the current list of members and the meeting schedule, see MWI-40.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Overview

According to the G-NHSRC and the G-COMREC, the primary scope of information assessed by the two (2) National Commission for Science and Technology (NCST)-approved ethics committees (ECs)—the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) and the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC)—relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial.

The G-HlthResConduct states that scientific design; recruitment of research participants; care and protection of research participants; ethical consideration; and community consideration are essential elements that the NHSRC and COMREC must review in a clinical trial application. Per the G-NHSRC, the NHSRC must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations).

The G-HlthResConduct and the R-HlthResCoord indicate that COMREC, as a subsidiary of NHSRC, only reviews and approves studies involving or originating from the College of Medicine (COM) or Kamuzu College of Nursing (KCN) (now known collectively as the Kamuzu University of Health Sciences (KUHeS), per MWI-62) faculty members and students, and their collaborators/coinvestigators/affiliates. The NHSRC has the sole jurisdiction to review studies with a national interest and multicenter studies, including those from COM and KCN, as well as studies from all other researchers and institutions.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

The R-HlthResCoord indicates that before submitting a clinical trial application to the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA), the sponsor or principal investigator (PI) must obtain full ethical approval from either the NHSRC or COMREC. Parallel submissions of a clinical trial application to an EC and the PMRA are prohibited.

Moreover, as specified in the R-HlthResCoord, for all studies originating outside Malawi, the sponsor or the PI is required to obtain approval from an EC based in their country prior to submitting an application to the NHSRC or COMREC for ethical review and approval.

Per the G-NHSRC and the G-COMREC, the applicable EC will screen submitted applications for completeness, and help determine the type of review to be conducted.

Per the COMREC-Format, COMREC will send a written acknowledgement within two (2) weeks of receipt of the proposal. Following COMREC’s review, the results and comments from the Research Committee will be sent to the PI within two (2) weeks. This response will include how to proceed (e.g., resubmission or response for specific issues).

The G-NHSRC states that new studies submitted to the NHSRC are generally reviewed by a fully convened NHSRC meeting. The following studies will be reviewed by the full NHSRC:

All high-risk studies
Studies involving vulnerable populations (including pregnant women, prisoners, mentally incompetent patients, etc.)
Any clinical interventional study that randomly assigns human participants to alternative experimental or placebo groups
Studies involving sensitive information connected to personal identifiers
Studies previously reviewed that require major issues to be addressed
The G-NHSRC and the G-COMREC indicate that following the NHSRC’s or COMREC’s review, the EC will decide to approve the research, stipulate minor changes for approval, or not approve the research. A negative decision on an application must be supported by clearly stated reasons. In addition, the G-NHSRC states that if the NHSRC determines that substantive changes/clarifications must be made before approval may be granted, the study will be deferred for a full NHSRC meeting.

The G-COMREC specifies that the COMREC’s approval of a new application is valid for one (1) year. However, the R-HlthResCoord indicates that EC approval of a study is valid for the period of the study as described in the protocol, which is effective from the date of approval as indicated in the approval letter.

The R-HlthResCoord, the G-NHSRC, and the G-COMREC state that the EC must review and approve any protocol amendments prior to those changes being implemented. See MWI-52 and MWI-44 for the NHSRC and COMREC amendment request forms, respectively. Any changes cannot be implemented until approved by the EC.

The G-COMREC requires that COMREC follow the progress of studies for which a positive decision has been reached and establish a subcommittee responsible for monitoring ongoing studies. The follow-up review intervals are determined by the nature of the research project. However, each protocol should undergo a follow-up review at least once a year. As part of its monitoring process, COMREC conducts inspections of institutions and study sites.

Studies of National Interest

All studies of national interest, as defined in the G-NHSRC, the G-COMREC, and the R-HlthResCoord to include all vaccine trials and stem cell research, should be referred to the NHSRC, regardless of the origin of the protocol. The NHSRC may form a standing committee for that specific project, which will monitor the project through to its conclusion, composed of members to be drawn on the basis of their expertise.

Multicenter Studies

As delineated in the R-HlthResCoord, the NHSRC is designated and mandated to review and approve multicenter clinical trials, including those originating outside Malawi. The NHSRC will conduct a full initial review of the same protocols for a multicenter study submitted by different investigators provided that such protocols are submitted simultaneously. Protocols for the same multicenter trial to be implemented at different institutions may also be merged into one (1) protocol that the NHSRC will treat as a joint submission for review.

Continuing Review

According to the G-NHSRC and the G-COMREC, all approved studies running for more than one (1) year are subject to continuing annual review by the approving EC (the NHSRC or COMREC). If the materials for continuing EC review are not received within one (1) month following the expiration date of the previous approval, then the study will be classified as lapsed and inactive. If a study has lapsed, the EC will order that all study-related operations cease, except those necessary for the welfare of the participants. Per the G-NHSRC, if the PI wants to continue an NHSRC-reviewed study that has lapsed for two (2) months, the PI must submit a new application for NHSRC review and wait for approval before resuming research under the protocol. MWI-53 indicates that the NHSRC follows, at a minimum, the regulations set forth in the Declaration of Helsinki (MWI-42) and the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) guidelines as the criteria for continuing review of a study. The PI is responsible for timely submission of a continuing review application to prevent any lapse in NHSRC approval. NHSRC regulations do not provide for exceptions to the requirement for continuing review. The NHSRC’s continuing review application form is available at MWI-53.

Expedited Review

Per the G-NHSRC and the G-COMREC, research studies that have previously been reviewed by a fully convened committee and require the PI to address minor issues, may be approved through the NHSRC’s or COMREC’s expedited processes. Studies by students may also be considered for expedited review. Expedited review can be considered for continuing review of research previously approved by the NHSRC or COMREC, where the research is permanently closed to the enrollment of new subjects, and all subjects have completed all research related interventions.

Per the G-COMREC, COMREC’s review period for such a resubmission must not exceed 14 days from the date of the resubmission. The G-NHSRC further indicates that the NHSRC will also consider expedited review for continuing review of research previously approved by NHSRC where no subjects have been enrolled and no additional risks have been identified, or where the remaining research activities are limited to data analysis and report writing.

For more information on each EC’s expedited review procedures, see the G-NHSRC and the G-COMREC.

Exemption from Review

As delineated in the G-NHSRC and the G-COMREC, certain types of human participants research may be exempted from NHSRC or COMREC review. Exemption may be considered for research involving the collection or study of existing data, documents, records, program evaluation, pathological specimens, or diagnostic specimens, if the sources are publicly available or if the information is recorded by the investigator in such a manner that subjects cannot be identified directly or through identifiers linked to the subjects.

Suspension or Termination of Study/Approval

Per the G-NHSRC, the NHSRC chairperson or the convened NHSRC may suspend a study at any time if it is determined that the study requires further review or evaluation. This determination may be made in the event of an adverse event, non-compliance, or other danger to human participants. The study will be reviewed at the next convened meeting to determine if it requires changes. The NHSRC must notify the PI and the sponsor in writing specifying reasons for suspension or termination with a copy to the National Research Council of Malawi (NRCM). The NRCM must be informed of all the suspended or terminated studies with detailed reasons for the decision. In the event of documented serious adverse events and any unanticipated problems as documented by the researcher, the NHSRC must terminate the study and order the investigator to follow up with study participants. In the case of any officially or unofficially reported noncompliance, protocol violation, or deviation by the researcher, the NHSRC must suspend the study to ensure safety of the study participants and carry out an investigation. Upon investigation of the problem prompting the suspension of the study, the convened NHSRC must terminate the study if convinced beyond any reasonable doubt that there was noncompliance, deviation, or violation of the protocol.

The G-COMREC states that COMREC may recommend to COM management suspension or termination of approval of research that is not being conducted in accordance with the guidelines, or that has been associated with unexpected serious harm to participants. Any suspension or termination of approval must include a statement of the reasons for COMREC's action and must be reported promptly to the investigator, appropriate institutional officials, Dean of Postgraduate Studies and Research, and the Principal of the COM. The Principal of the COM must then send a report of suspended or terminated studies with the reasons contained therein to the NCST and the PMRA, or any other government agency responsible for research policy matters.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
National Health Sciences Research Committee

According to MWI-4 and MWI-15, non-Malawian researchers must pay $150 USD or its equivalent in Malawian Kwacha to the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) upon submission of a research proposal. Malawian students (Masters and below) are required to pay 5000 Malawian Kwacha.

The G-NHSRC indicates that following the protocol’s approval, the principal investigator must also pay the Ministry of Health (MOH) a fee of 10% of the total budget indicated in the proposal to cover NHSRC institutional capacity strengthening and administrative operating expenses. MWI-15 further specifies that the fee, referred to as a 10% NHSRC Human Subject Protection (HSP) fee, must be paid by PhD students and above.

Payment Instructions

Per MWI-15, the application fee and the 10% HSP fee may be paid at the MOH Headquarters Cash Office or through the following bank details:

Account Name: NHSRC NCST Review Fees
Account Number: 1010759176
Bank Name: National Bank of Malawi
Bank Address: Capital City Branch, Lilongwe 3, Malawi
Swift Code: NBMAMWMW008

College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee

Per MWI-1 and MWI-40 researchers must provide evidence of payment of $150 USD to the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC) upon the submission of a research proposal. MWI-1 states that COMREC is also mandated to charge a College of Medicine (COM) fee of 10% of the total budget indicated in the proposal. The COM’s Dean of Postgraduate Studies and Research can grant waivers for the 10% fee.

However, the G-COMREC states that the COM’s processing fee is $100 USD for each new protocol submission and resubmission for the fourth time, and that eligible investigators may apply to management for exemption from paying the fee. The COMREC-Format also states that the PI must submit a $100 processing fee or its equivalent.

Payment Instructions

As indicated in MWI-43, the processing fee for ethics application submissions should be made at the following account, and the deposit slip emailed to comrec@medcol.mw:

Account Name: COMREC / College of Medicine
Account Number: 9100003028906
Name of Bank: Standard Bank
Name of Branch: Ginnery Corner; Current account
Swift Code: SBICMWMX

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Overview

The R-HlthResCoord indicates that the National Commission for Science and Technology (NCST) is the central statutory body responsible for coordinating and regulating all research, science, and technology related activities in Malawi, as mandated by the SciTechAct.

The R-HlthResCoord further specifies that the NCST provides oversight to the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) and the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC). The NCST’s core responsibilities in this capacity include:

Participating as an ex-officio member for the NHSRC and COMREC by having a voting representative from the NCST sit on both committees
Reviewing and approving the ethics committees’ (EC) guidelines and standard operating procedures
Monitoring the ECs’ performance and adherence to relevant national policies, laws, regulations, and guidelines
Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

As stated in the SciTechOrder, an NCST-issued license is required for the accreditation of research institutions and the establishment of an institutional EC. Additional information regarding the NCST-issued license is not available at this time.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Overview

According to the G-CTARevVacBiol, the R-HlthResCoord, and MWI-50, the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) requires the applicant to obtain PMRA approval and ethics committee (EC) approval of a clinical trial application.

The R-HlthResCoord indicates that before submitting a clinical trial application to the PMRA, the sponsor or principal investigator (PI) must obtain full ethical approval from either of the two (2) National Commission for Science and Technology (NCST)-approved ECs—the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) or the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC). Parallel submissions of a clinical trial application to an EC and the PMRA are prohibited.

Regulatory Submission

According to MWI-60, an electronic or soft copy of the clinical trial application dossier must be sent to the PMRA at registration@pmra.mw and info@pmra.mw.

As per the G-CTARevVacBiol and MWI-9, applicants must submit three (3) copies of the clinical trial application to the PMRA. MWI-60 further requires that the three (3) dossier hard copies be submitted in a lever arch file to the Director General. Each section of the dossier must be well demarcated for ease of reference by PMRA reviewers. The application may be made by a sponsor or the sponsor’s agent, who must submit a power of attorney (MWI-33) attesting to be a duly appointed agent.

There is no specified language requirement for the clinical trial documents to be submitted to the PMRA.

Ethics Review Submission

National Health Sciences Research Committee

As stated in the G-HlthResConduct and MWI-15, the applicant is required to bind and submit application materials (plus an electronic copy, per MWI-15) to the NHSRC at least three (3) weeks before the date of the review meeting.

MWI-15 states that applications should be submitted to the NHSRC at the following address:

The Chairperson
National Health Sciences Research Committee
Ministry of Health Research Department Area 2/124
P.O. Box 30377
Lilongwe 3, Malawi
Tel: +265 1 789 400

The electronic copy should be submitted at the same time to research@health.gov.mw and mohdoccentre@gmail.com.

MWI-15 indicates that three (3) copies of each item indicated in the NHSRC Checklist (MWI-4) must be submitted in the research proposal package to the NHSRC (See the Submission Content section for a list of these items). Three (3) copies for Malawian student proposals (up to master’s level) must also be submitted to the NHSRC secretariat for expedited review. The submission must be bound in the order indicated by MWI-4 as one (1) PDF document. (See the Submission Content section for more details on the individual elements of the NHSRC research proposal submission.)

According to MWI-15 and MWI-4, the data collection tools and informed consent forms must be provided to the NHSRC in both English and Chichewa (or the appropriate local language).

The R-HlthResCoord indicates that for multicenter trials, sponsors and PIs may plan to hold a pre-clinical trial submission and authorization meeting with the NHSRC, at their own choice and cost. The sponsor or PI must write to the NHSRC secretariat of the review committee to request the meeting’s arrangement at least four (4) weeks in advance of the suggested meeting date. For more information, see the R-HlthResCoord.

College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee

Per the R-HlthResCoord, COMREC may at its own discretion allow a pre-clinical trial application procedure, where applicable, at the request and cost of the sponsor. As stated in the G-HlthResConduct, the applicant is required to submit application materials to COMREC at least three (3) weeks before the date of the review meeting. However, the COMREC-Format states that the PI must send copies of the proposal to the COMREC Secretary 30 days before the date of the meeting. Further, a letter from the respective department head(s) indicating that the research has the approval of the department(s) must be sent to the Secretariat with the proposal. Research affiliations must submit a supporting letter from the department head. To see the COMREC meeting schedule, see MWI-40.

As noted in the COMREC-Format, COMREC recognizes that different funding agencies may have different guidelines/format requirements. Where this is the case, the PI should prepare the proposal in the required format, provided that the format used gives all or most of the details as contained in COMREC’s guidelines. The PI must provide supportive evidence for the format used to the Secretariat. Otherwise, the proposed guidelines and format should be followed.

Per the COMREC-Format, the PI must prepare four (4) copies of the proposal. According to MWI-10, protocol submissions to COMREC may be made through the Research Ethics Information Management System (REIMS) (MWI-19). Following submission, the protocol will be reviewed, and feedback will be given through the applicant’s registered email address. All file attachments should be in PDF format with clear, descriptive names. Per MWI-19, ECs in Tanzania, Rwanda, and Kenya also participate in REIMS. See MWI-10 for more information on the REIMS submission portal.

MWI-19 provides the following additional contact information for COMREC:

Tel: +265 888 118 993
Email: comrec@medcol.mw

However, MWI-1 indicates that all documents should be submitted to COMREC by email to comrec@medcol.mw in one (1) PDF file, if the file size does not exceed 5MB. If the file size is over 5MB, then the file should be sent as a compressed zipped file. The data collection tools and informed consent forms must be provided in both English and Chichewa (or the appropriate local language).

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

As per the G-CTAProcsVacBiol, the G-CTARevVacBiol, and MWI-60, the following documentation must be submitted to the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) in an application to conduct a clinical trial (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Comprehensive table of contents for the entire application, including a complete list of all documents provided in the application. The location of each document should be identified by tab identifiers. In general, the name for the tab identifier should be the name of the document
Cover letter signed by the principal investigator (PI) or sponsor
Proof of payment of the application and registration fees
Signed and stamped Clinical Trial Application (Form CT 8) (MWI-9)
Current version of the study protocol signed and dated by the sponsor and investigator (in the format provided in the International Council for Harmonisation’s (ICH) good clinical practice (GCP) guidelines and/or in line with Attachment 1 of MWI-60)
Investigator’s Brochure (IB), where applicable (in the format provided in the ICH GCP guidelines)
Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) of the investigational product (IP) (also referred to as an investigational medicinal product (IMP) in Malawi) and/or placebo, or evidence of manufacture quality, safety, and consistency
Mock-up labels for the IP
Blank case report forms (CRFs) and serious adverse events (SAEs) reporting form to be used in the study
Investigational Medicinal Product Dossier (IMPD) or alternative as provided in Attachment 2 of MWI-60
Stability data of the IP and auxiliary medicine(s) for climatic zone IVa if not registered in Malawi by the PMRA
Evidence of registration of the IP or auxiliary medicines in a country with Stringent Regulatory Authority (SRA) and/or Certificate of Pharmaceutical Product (CoPP), i.e., if IP/auxiliary medicines are not registered by the PMRA
Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC) for IP and auxiliary medicines
Pharmacy plan
Report summaries of prior clinical trials with the IP (part of IB if it is in the ICH format)
Capacity building plans including training and updating of staff involved in the trial
Informed consent form (ICF) (in ICH format)
Declaration of intent by the national PI or contact person (MWI-31)
Signed and completed declaration by investigators (MWI-32)
Investigator(s) Curriculum Vitae(s) (CVs), including that of pharmacist(s)
Financial declaration by sponsor and PI (MWI-59)
Ethical clearance certificate from an independent ethics committee (EC) recognized by the laws of Malawi
Certified copy of clinical trial insurance for study participants endorsed by the National Commission for Science and Technology (NCST)
Malpractice insurance for investigators and associated staff endorsed by the NCST
Evidence of accreditation or equivalent of the designated laboratories (see the World Health Organization (WHO)’s guidance on Good Clinical Laboratory Practice (MWI-30))
Completed PMRA Material Transfer Agreement Form on Shipping of Samples (MWI-14)
Description of the site facilities (pictorial presentations may be included)
Evidence of registration of investigators with appropriate bodies
Evidence of registration of pharmacists with the PMRA
Evidence of GCP training by investigators and pharmacists in the last three (3) years
Batch release certificate
Authorization of the clinical trial from the country of origin, if applicable
Full, legible copies of key, peer-reviewed published articles supporting the application
Any other requirement as may be determined by the PMRA
If any of the above items are not submitted, justification must be provided. The application may be made by a sponsor or the sponsor’s agent, who must submit a power of attorney (MWI-33) attesting to be a duly appointed agent. See MWI-60 for more details. According to MWI-34, the guidance in the G-CTARevVacBiol and the G-CTAProcsVacBiol also apply to clinical trials of drugs.

Ethics Committee Requirements

National Health Sciences Research Committee

According to the G-NHSRC, MWI-4, and MWI-15, any proposals submitted to the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) must be accompanied by the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The NHSRC checklist (MWI-4)
Cover letter from the PI
The NHSRC application form (MWI-15)
Research proposal summary, maximum four (4) pages
Full/main research proposal (see the G-NHSRC, MWI-4, and MWI-15 for details)
Data collection instruments in both English and Chichewa (or other appropriate local language)
Informed consent in both English and Chichewa (or other appropriate local language)
Letter of approval from foreign EC, where applicable (for all students studying in foreign universities)
Support letters from affiliating institutions (e.g., universities, hospitals, research institutions, or companies where the study is going to take place)
A copy of the receipt for the paid application fee
CVs for all the investigators
Proof of funding from the sponsor/funder (where applicable)
MWI-4 requires that if any of the above items are not included in the submission to the NHSRC, an explanation must be provided.

College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee

The COMREC-Format, MWI-1, and MWI-40 indicate that for submissions to the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC), a single PDF file should include the following information (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Completed copy of the COMREC checklist (MWI-1)
Cover letter from the PI
Protocol according to COMREC’s format (COMREC-Format)
ICFs in both English and Chichewa for adult participants ages 18 and above, parental consent forms for all minors, and assent forms (in addition to the parental consent forms) for all minors between the ages of 7 and 17 (template provided at MWI-56)
Data collection tools (those that will involve obtaining information from research participants should be translated into Chichewa)
Material transfer agreement forms and documents
Proof of payment of the processing fee
Waiver letter for the 10% College of Medicine (COM) overhead fee, if applicable
Information regarding whether the research proposal has been submitted to another EC
Letter of support from COM head of the principal department hosting the research
Letter(s) of support from heads of all other departments and institutions in which any research work will be done
Evidence of current active registration with the Medical Council of Malawi for the PI and other investigators
A copy of a brief CV of each of the investigators (one (1) copy of each), except those which have been submitted within the same academic year
Certificate of GCP/human participant protection
For re-submissions, MWI-40 indicates that all the documents listed above plus the following additional documents should be submitted:

Introduction letter explaining how queries were resolved
Revised protocol with tracked/highlighted changes
Revised protocol with accepted changes/clean version
For amendments, MWI-40 provides that the following documents should be submitted to COMREC:

Cover Letter
Amendment form (MWI-44)
Revised protocol with tracked/highlighted changes
Revised protocol with accepted changes/clean version
MWI-1 further indicates that the proposal should not be submitted unless every item on the checklist is included, or unless a reason can be provided for the absence of any item. The completed checklist must be attached to the front of the submission. See the G-COMREC and MWI-1 for more information.

Clinical Protocol

As delineated in the G-CTAProcsVacBiol, the clinical protocol should comply with the format provided in the ICH's GCP guidelines. Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the ICH's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). In addition, MWI-60 provides recommended items to address in a clinical trial protocol and related documents, based on SPIRIT (Standard Protocol Items: Recommendations for Interventional Trials) guidance.

In addition, per the G-HlthResConduct, MWI-60, and MWI-22, the following elements should be included in the protocol (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Cover page
General information (protocol title, identifying number, and date; registry name; contact information for the sponsor, medical expert, investigator(s), trial site(s), qualified physician(s), and laboratory and/or institutions involved in the study, along with role responsibilities)
Protocol summary/abstract
Background and justification
Investigator(s) CV(s) and contact information
IP description (See the Investigational Products topic for detailed coverage of this subject)
Form, dosage, route, method, and frequency of administration and treatment period
Summary of potential risks and known benefits to research participants
Hypothesis
Trial objectives and purpose
Study setting
Trial design, random selection method, and blinding level
Work plan/Gantt chart
Participant selection/withdrawal, timeline, and sample size
Participant treatment
Safety and efficacy assessments
Literature review
Adverse event reporting requirements (See the Safety Reporting section for additional information)
Statistics and methods to track trial data
Sponsor specifications for direct access to source data/documents
Quality control/quality assurance procedures and practices
Data monitoring, including composition of a data monitoring committee, and auditing
Ethical considerations, including confidentiality, and plans for seeking EC approval
Plans for communicating important protocol modifications to relevant parties
Data management and recordkeeping
Dissemination of findings
Financing and insurance details
Publication policy
Consent form, and information on who will obtain consent
Plans for collection, laboratory evaluation, and storage of biological specimens
For more detailed protocol requirements and recommendations, refer to MWI-60, MWI-22, and the G-HlthResConduct.

Per the COMREC-Format and MWI-1, COMREC recommends that a proposal (i.e., the protocol) involving COMREC staff include the following elements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Title
Full names, qualifications, and academic titles of all investigators and their trainees; the PI should be listed first, co-investigators should be indicated, and brief up-to-date CVs of each investigator should be provided
Institution(s) under whose umbrella the research project will be conducted
Executive summary, not to exceed one (1) and half pages
Background information and introduction
Rationale/justification for the research project
Objectives of the study
A detailed methodology, including the type of study, study place, study population, study period, sample size, data collection, data management and analysis, results presentation, and dissemination of the results
Ethical considerations
Possible constraints and how these will be addressed, by whom and when
Requirements for conducting the research, such as personnel, sites, material, equipment, and transportation
Budgetary estimates with each line item quantified in monetary terms
Training provided for study staff
References
See the COMREC-Format and MWI-1 for more details on each of these proposal components.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Overview

As stated in the R-HlthResCoord, one (1) of the two (2) government approved ethics committees (ECs), the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) or the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC), must review and approve a clinical trial application prior to the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) initiating its review and approval process. Parallel submissions of a clinical trial application to an EC and the PMRA are prohibited.

Regulatory Authority Approval

According to the G-CTARevVacBiol, the PMRA review process takes approximately six (6) weeks.

As per the G-CTARevVacBiol and the G-CTAProcsVacBiol, once the dossier is submitted to the PMRA, the application is screened for completeness. According to the G-CTARevVacBiol, the result of the screening will be communicated to the applicant within 10 working days after receipt of the application, and the screening form will be forwarded by fax. The applicant will have 10 working days to forward any outstanding documents to the PMRA. The PMRA’s technical staff then reviews the application or may forward it to an expert or evaluator for scientific review, with an allocated review period of three (3) weeks.

However, the G-CTAProcsVacBiol specifies that the application is evaluated by three (3) PMRA-appointed expert clinical trial reviewers who will provide a written report within 14 days to the designated registration office, also known as the “Focal Point” division. The Focal Point will then collate and present the expert reviews to the PMRA Clinical Trial Review Committee (CTRC). The CTRC then reviews all the available documentation and provides a recommendation for approval or rejection. The PMRA considers the CTRC’s recommendation and issues a written approval or rejection. (Per MWI-34, the guidance in the G-CTARevVacBiol and the G-CTAProcsVacBiol also apply to clinical trials of drugs.)

As stated in the G-ImpExpMP, the PMRA’s processing time for an import permit application is 10 working days.

Ethics Committee Approval

National Health Sciences Research Committee

The G-NHSRC indicates that in the case of an approval with no changes, the chairperson must inform the investigator in writing within seven (7) days. The NHSRC’s timeline for review of research proposals is not otherwise specified in the requirements.

College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee

According to the G-COMREC, COMREC must ensure that submitted complete proposals are reviewed in a timely manner, i.e., within the month of submission. Per the G-COMREC and the COMREC-Format, a written decision is provided to the applicant within two (2) weeks of the meeting at which the decision was made.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Overview

According to the G-CTARevVacBiol, the R-HlthResCoord, and MWI-50, the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) requires the applicant to obtain PMRA approval and ethics committee (EC) approval before initiating a clinical trial.

The R-HlthResCoord indicates that before submitting a clinical trial application to the PMRA, the sponsor or principal investigator (PI) must obtain full ethical approval from either of the two (2) National Commission for Science and Technology (NCST)-approved ECs—the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) or the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC).

In addition, as per the D-ImprtRelIMPs, the sponsor should not supply the investigational product (IP) to be used in the clinical trial until the sponsor obtains all required documentation. As stated in the G-ImpExpMP, IP import permit applications should be made by the pharmacist of record for the trial. (See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information.)

Clinical Trial Agreement

The G-CTAProcsVacBiol requires the sponsor to sign a letter of agreement with the participating institution(s) before the trial begins. In addition, the investigators and the sponsor or the contract research organization must sign an agreement specific to the clinical trial.

Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 indicates that the sponsor should obtain the investigator’s/institution’s agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with good clinical practice (GCP), with the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and with the approved protocol
Comply with procedures for data recording/reporting
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain the trial related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution these documents are no longer needed
The sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement.

Clinical Trial Registration

No clinical trials registry exists at this time and there is no stated requirement to register in an international registry.

Governance

For proposals subject to COMREC review, the COMREC-Format states that all research proposals, including resubmissions, must be submitted through and endorsed by the respective department head(s), with supporting letters from the department and affiliated institutions where applicable. The department head acts as the formal channel for submissions, ensuring departmental approval before proposals reach the Secretariat.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

In accordance with the G-SAEs-PMRA, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Malawi’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any AE associated with the use of a medicine in humans, and which does not necessarily bear a causal relationship to the treatment. This may include an AE occurring in the following circumstances: during use in professional practice; from an overdose, whether accidental or intentional; from drug abuse; from drug withdrawal; and as a result of any failure of expected pharmacological action.
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – A reaction characterized by the suspicion of a causal relationship between the drug and the occurrence.
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) – An adverse experience occurring at any dose that results in death, is life-threatening, requires or extends patient hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability, is a birth defect or congenital anomaly; or is an important medical event that, based upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the participant, and may require intervention to prevent one (1) of the listed outcomes.
Safety Reporting Requirements

As stated in the G-SAEs-PMRA, the sponsor or the investigator(s) is required to report all SAEs that meet the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA)’s reporting requirements as soon as possible (within 24-72 hours) following site awareness using the SAE Form (MWI-12). All deaths that are assessed as definitely, probably, or possibly related must be reported to the PMRA within 24 hours of site awareness, and the SAE Form (MWI-12) must be submitted within three (3) working days of site awareness. See the G-SAEs-PMRA for additional details on reporting timelines for different reportable SAE situations.

The G-NHSRC indicates that the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) requires the investigator to submit a written report for any occurrence of an AE. In the event of documented SAEs and any unanticipated problems as documented by the researcher, the NHSRC must terminate the study and order the investigator to follow up with study participants. Per the G-COMREC, AE and SAE reports must also be submitted to the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC).

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

As per the G-SAEs-PMRA, all SAEs that meet reporting requirements must be reported to the PMRA on an SAE Form (MWI-12). The G-SAEs-PMRA indicates that the form must be submitted to the PMRA office by email or hand delivered to the offices at the following address:

The Director General
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
P.O. Box 30241
Lilongwe 3, Malawi
Tel: 265-1755166/165
Email: info@pmra.mw, registration@pmra.mw

According to the G-NHSRC, AE reports submitted to the NHSRC must provide the following details:

Title of protocol
NHSRC assigned reference number
Name of investigator
Local affiliating institution for studies originating from outside Malawi
Subject identifier
Date and site/place of event
Description of event (i.e., nature of injury or other adverse occurrence, assessment of severity, and assessment of relationship of the event to the study)
Action taken by the researcher
Signature of the principal investigator (PI)
See MWI-2 for the NHSRC SAE Reporting Form.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 notes that the investigator should promptly provide written reports to the sponsor and the institutional ethics committee (EC) on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to participants.

According to the G-NHSRC, the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) requires an initial submission of a progress report within three (3) months of approval of the study, and an annual report for medium to long-term studies.

The G-COMREC requires that the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC) follow the progress of studies for which a positive decision has been reached and establish a subcommittee responsible for monitoring ongoing studies. As part of the monitoring process, every approved study must submit annual reports by November 30, regardless of the date of its approval.

As required in MWI-58, the principal investigator (PI) must submit an annual progress report to the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA). All sections of the Clinical Trial Annual Progress Reporting Form for Investigators (MWI-58) must be completed in typescript and submitted together with accompanying documents to the PMRA Director General at info@pmra.mw. Both hard and soft (electronic) copies must be submitted.

The G-NHSRC and the G-COMREC further state that all approved studies continuing for more than one (1) year are subject to continuing review by the approving EC. As part of this review, applicant(s) are required to submit a progress report describing the number of participants enrolled, any problems that occurred during the prior approval period, any new knowledge regarding the study, and any procedural changes.

See MWI-54 and MWI-8 for the NHSRC and COMREC report forms, respectively.

Final Report

As required by the G-NHSRC and the G-COMREC, the applicant is required to submit a final report to the approving EC when a study is completed.

According to the G-NHSRC, the investigator must submit three (3) copies of the final technical report when submitting written notice of the completion of the study to NHSRC.

Other Considerations

The G-NHSRC states that all data originating from a research study conducted in Malawi are the property of the Malawi Government irrespective of the source of funds for carrying out the study. Therefore, investigators are required to submit copies of their reports to NHSRC for review prior to submitting for publication within or outside of Malawi. Investigators are expected to have plans for disseminating research findings in Malawi.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
As per the D-ImprtRelIMPs and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22), a sponsor is defined as an individual, company, institution, or organization that takes responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a clinical trial. Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow MWI-22. MWI-22 goes on to specify that a sponsor-investigator is an individual who both initiates and conducts, alone or with others, a clinical trial, and under whose immediate direction the investigational product is administered to, dispensed to, or used by a participant. The term does not include any person other than an individual (e.g., it does not include a corporation or an agency). The obligations of a sponsor-investigator include both those of a sponsor and those of an investigator.

In accordance with MWI-22, a sponsor may transfer any or all of its trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO) and/or institutional site(s). However, the ultimate responsibility for the trial data’s quality and integrity always resides with the sponsor. Any trial-related responsibilities transferred to a CRO should be specified in a written agreement. The CRO should implement quality assurance and quality control.

A sponsor may be domestic or foreign. As specified in the R-HlthResCoord, a sponsor that is a foreign company, organization, or individual(s), must first be affiliated with a local Malawian institution that is recognized by the National Commission for Science and Technology (NCST) prior to commencing any operations in the country.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Overview

The G-CTAProcsVacBiol specifies that the investigator(s) must be qualified, experienced, and have specific good clinical practice (GCP) training. The principal investigator (PI) should have acted as a sub-investigator in at least one (1) prior clinical study. The investigator must also commit to complying with the clinical trial protocol, have no conflicts of interest, and have no history of GCP noncompliance.

Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 provides the following guidance to sponsors on investigator and site selection:

The sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s)/institution(s). Each investigator should be qualified by training and experience and should have adequate resources to properly conduct the trial for which the investigator is selected. If the organization of a coordinating committee and/or selection of coordinating investigator(s) are to be utilized in multicenter trials, their organization and/or selection are the sponsor’s responsibility.
Before entering an agreement with an investigator/institution to conduct a trial, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the protocol and an up-to-date Investigator’s Brochure, and should provide sufficient time for the investigator/institution to review the protocol and the information provided.
As stated in the G-CTAProcsVacBiol, all clinical trials must also be conducted in a laboratory that can provide evidence of accreditation with a recognized control authority to conduct the specified test. In the absence of an accreditation authority, proof of Good Laboratory Practice compliance and validation of assay methods should be provided.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

According to the G-NHSRC, foreign researchers must be affiliated with a local institution and provide a supporting letter from the institution as evidence. Additionally, they must have a local collaborator. The R-HlthResCoord further indicates that any foreign-based institution or organization must first be affiliated with a local Malawian institution that is recognized by the National Commission for Science and Technology (NCST) prior to commencing any operations in the country.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

Although not specified as a sponsor requirement, the G-CTAProcsVacBiol states that a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) or a similar body must be established and empowered to regularly assess the trial and to recommend a pause or termination of the trial for safety reasons. MWI-22 notes that a DSMB may be established to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial.

Multicenter Studies

As delineated in MWI-22, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor, and given ethics committee (EC) approval
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication among investigators is facilitated
Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Insurance

As set forth in the G-CTInsurance-MWI, the G-CTAProcsVacBiol, the G-CTARevVacBiol, and the G-COMREC, the sponsor or the investigator(s) are responsible for providing insurance coverage for any unforeseen injury to research participants. Before a clinical trial begins, the sponsor should also provide insurance or indemnify the investigator and the institution against claims arising from malpractice or negligence. See the G-CTInsurance-MWI, the G-CTAProcsVacBiol, the G-CTARevVacBiol, and the G-COMREC for detailed information on when insurance is required.

As per the G-CTInsurance-MWI, the sponsor or the investigator(s) must provide the participants with a no-fault insurance policy and certificate for the duration of the trial, and for five (5) years following the trial’s completion. “No-fault” is defined as insurance for which proof of negligence or other wrongful conduct need not be established. However, the causal connection between the trial and harm, bodily injury, or death must be proven to trigger the obligation to make a compensation payment. The National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC), the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC), or the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA)'s Clinical Trial Review Committee are responsible for determining which clinical trials fall within the scope of this requirement.

Per the G-CTInsurance-MWI, obtaining and submitting insurance is a requirement and a prerequisite to obtaining clinical trial ethics and regulatory approval. The insurance documentation must be included as part of the application package submitted to either the NHSRC or COMREC, and the PMRA. As specified in the G-CTAProcsVacBiol, the sponsor or the investigator(s) must also comply with the insurance and compensation requirements delineated in the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry’s guidelines (MWI-21 and MWI-20).

The PMRA’s Indemnity Form for Conducting Clinical Trials (Form CT 10) is available at MWI-18.

Compensation

Injury or Death

As specified in the G-CTInsurance-MWI, the G-CTAProcsVacBiol, and the G-COMREC, the sponsor is responsible for providing compensation to research participants and/or their legal heirs in the event of trial-related injuries or death. Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 provides guidance for sponsors on providing compensation to research participants in the event of trial-related injuries or death. The sponsor must explain to participants the compensation and/or treatment available to them in the event of trial-related injuries.

As per the G-CTAProcsVacBiol, the sponsor must follow the principles set forth in the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry’s guidelines (MWI-21 and MWI-20) to comply with Malawi’s participant compensation and treatment requirements due to trial-related injuries. The guidelines state that the sponsor should furnish written assurance to the investigator that the sponsor will agree to pay compensation to participants and/or the legal heirs in the event of trial-related injuries or death. The investigator, in turn, communicates this information to the relevant ethics committees (ECs).

MWI-21 provides several basic principles to guide sponsors in fulfilling their compensation obligations. Compensation should be paid as follows:

When it can be demonstrated that a causal relationship exists between a participant’s injury and participation in a trial
When a child is injured in utero through participation by the child’s mother in a clinical trial
When the injury results in permanent injury or disability to the participant
When there is an adverse reaction to a medicinal product under trial, and injury is caused by a procedure adopted to deal with that adverse reaction
MWI-21 states that the likelihood of an adverse reaction, or the fact that the participant has freely consented (whether in writing or otherwise) to participate in the trial should not exclude the participant from being eligible for compensation. The amount of compensation paid to the participant should be appropriate to the nature, severity, and persistence of the injury. The compensation should also be generally consistent with the amount of damages commonly awarded for similar injuries.

According to MWI-21, the amount paid in compensation should be abated, or in certain circumstances excluded, in light of the following factors (which will depend on the risk level the participant can reasonably be expected to accept):

The seriousness of the disease being treated
The degree of probability that adverse reactions will occur and any warning given
The risks and benefits of the established treatments relative to those known or suspected of the trial medicines
Per MWI-21, in any case where the sponsor agrees to pay the participant, but the two (2) parties differ on what is the appropriate level of compensation, it is recommended that the sponsor agree to seek the opinion of a mutually acceptable independent expert at the sponsor’s own cost. This opinion should then be made available to the participant(s), and the expert’s opinion should be given substantial weight by the sponsor in reaching a decision on the payment amount.

Additionally, any participant claims pursuant to MWI-21, should be made to the sponsor, preferably via the investigator. The participant should include details on the nature and background of the claim, which the sponsor should review expeditiously. The review process may be delayed if the participant requests an authority to examine any medical records relevant to the claim.

Trial Participation

Per G-BioSampCompense, participants may also be reimbursed for trial-related expenses, if allowed by the EC. However, payments to participants that are construed to affect their voluntary participation are not allowed. Furthermore, lump sum payments for research participation are not allowed. Participants who incur direct costs from trial participation must be reimbursed if required by the EC. Such reimbursable expenses include travel and communications costs associated with routine clinical trial evaluations. During review of the protocol, the EC will make a case-by-case determination if the study should provide any form of acceptable recompense.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 guides sponsors on quality, data, and records management.

Per MWI-22, the sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, focusing on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that includes:

During protocol development, identification of processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results
Identification of risks to critical trial processes and data
Evaluation of the identified risks against existing risk controls
Decisions on which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept
Documentation of quality management activities and communication to those involved in or affected by these activities
Periodic review of risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant
In the clinical study report, a description of the quality management approach implemented in the trial and a summary of important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken
Monitoring Requirements

As part of its quality assurance system, the G-CTAProcsVacBiol notes that the sponsor should perform a clinical trial audit. The purpose of the audit should be to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, standard operating procedures (SOPs), and other applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor should appoint auditors to review the clinical trial. The sponsor should ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience, and the auditor’s qualifications should be documented. The sponsor must also ensure that the audit is conducted in accordance with the sponsor’s own SOPs, the auditor observations are documented, and data are available as needed for the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) to review. No specific timeframe is provided for the audit process.

Per MWI-22, the sponsor should develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The extent and nature of monitoring is flexible and permits varied approaches that improve effectiveness and efficiency. The sponsor may choose on-site monitoring, a combination of on-site and centralized monitoring, or where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan).

Per MWI-61, the PMRA may conduct good clinical practice (GCP) inspections of clinical trial sites before regulatory approval, while the trial is ongoing, when participants are being enrolled in a trial, on a routine basis, when triggered by a complaint, or if there is a suspicion of serious non-compliance integrity issues and/or scientific/ethical misconduct. In general, the inspectee will be notified one (1) to four (4) weeks prior to the proposed announced inspection date and asked to confirm availability. The notification will identify the study and the proposed sites to be inspected. In relation to triggered inspections, the PMRA may provide a shorter notice period. The inspection dates will be confirmed with the inspectee, who may be required to submit information to the PMRA within 14 days of the receipt of the notice of GCP inspection. The inspection plan is finalized by the PMRA before the inspection. See MWI-61 for more information on PMRA GCP inspections.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

According to MWI-22, if it is discovered that noncompliance significantly affects or has the potential to significantly affect participant protection or reliability of trial results, the sponsor should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions. Further, the ethics committee (EC) should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor. Refer to MWI-17 for the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC)’s protocol termination form.

The G-COMREC states that if a study is prematurely suspended/terminated, the applicant should notify the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC) of the reasons for suspension/termination, and a summary of the results obtained should be communicated to the committee.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). As per MWI-22, when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor must ensure that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. The sponsor should base their approach to validate such systems on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use and the potential of the system to affect participant protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, the sponsor should maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) for the systems that cover system setup, installation, and use. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the system users should be provided with training. Refer to MWI-22 for additional information.

Records Management

As set forth in MWI-22, sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application, until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications, or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of the investigational product’s clinical development. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed.

In addition, MWI-22 states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.

According to MWI-15, consent forms must be kept for three (3) years after the completion of the investigation, unless otherwise stipulated by the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC).

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Responsible Parties

For the purposes of data protection requirements, as stated in the G-DataPrtct-MWI, the data controller means a natural or legal person who, alone or jointly with another natural or legal person, determines the purpose and means of processing personal data. The data processor means a natural or legal person who processes personal data on behalf of a data controller. The Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority (MACRA) regulates the processing of personal data and is responsible for the enforcement of the G-DataPrtct-MWI.

Data Protection

A data controller and data processor must process personal data lawfully, fairly, and in a transparent manner, as described in the G-DataPrtct-MWI. Additionally, a data controller and data processor must collect personal data for a specific and legitimate purpose and must not process the data in a manner that is incompatible with the purpose for which it was collected. They also must not store personal data for a period that is longer than necessary to achieve the purpose for which the data is processed, except where the data is stored for the purpose of archiving for public interest or for research or statistical purposes. The appropriate technical or organizational security measures must be implemented to guarantee the security of personal data, including protection against unauthorized or unlawful processing and accidental loss, destruction, or damage of the data.

See the G-DataPrtct-MWI and MWI-64 for more details on the duties of a data controller and data processor.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

The G-DataPrtct-MWI indicates that a data controller must obtain the consent of a data subject before processing the personal data of the data subject. Where a data controller seeks consent from a data subject on several matters in the form of a written declaration, each matter on which consent is sought must be presented in a clearly distinguishable manner. A data subject may, at any time, withdraw consent given to a data controller and the withdrawal of the consent shall, where practicable, be in the same manner the consent was provided. The withdrawal must not affect the legality of the data processing that occurred before the withdrawal of the consent. Where a question arises on whether consent was freely provided, consideration must be taken of whether the performance of a contract between the data controller and the data subject, or the delivery of a good or a service by the data controller to the data subject, is conditional on provision of the consent.

According to the G-DataPrtct-MWI, a data controller must, at the time of collecting personal data from a data subject, provide the following information to the data subject:

The identity and contact details of the data controller or representative of the data controller
The legal basis for processing the personal data
The purpose for processing the personal data
Where possible, the storage period for the personal data
The existence of automated decision-making, including profiling
The rights of the data subject provided in the G-DataPrtct-MWI (described below)
The right to lodge a complaint with the MACRA
Whether the data controller intends to transfer the personal data to a place outside Malawi
As per the G-DataPrtct-MWI, a data subject has the right to obtain confirmation of whether personal data concerning the data subject is being processed by the data controller or data processor. Where the data controller or data processor confirms the processing of the personal data of the data subject, the data controller or data processor must provide the data subject with a copy of the personal data being processed (i) in a commonly used electronic format; (ii) within 30 days of receipt of the request; and (iii) where practicable, at no expense to the data subject. The data subject also has a right to data portability, rectification of personal data, erasure of personal data, restriction of processing personal data, object to the processing of personal data, and not to be subject to a decision based solely on automated processing. See the G-DataPrtct-MWI for more information on these rights.

Children and Incapacitated Persons

The G-DataPrtct-MWI delineates that where a data subject is a child or any other natural person lacking the legal capacity to exercise the rights of the data subject, a parent or legal representative/guardian of the data subject must exercise the rights of the data subject on behalf of the data subject. A data controller or data processor who intends to process personal data of a data subject who is a child or any other natural person lacking legal capacity to provide consent must obtain the consent from a parent or legal representative/guardian of the data subject. Additionally, the data controller or data processor who obtains such consent must put in place appropriate mechanisms to verify the age of the child or the mental capacity of the other natural person, as well as the identity of the parent or legal representative/guardian providing the consent.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Malawian clinical trials, a freely given informed consent is required to be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the G-NHSRC, the G-COMREC, and MWI-40. The G-BioSampCompense also confirms that a participant’s voluntary informed consent is required. Also, per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22).

As per the G-NHSRC, the G-CTAProcsVacBiol, the G-CTARevVacBiol, the G-COMREC, and MWI-22, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by one (1) of the two (2) National Commission for Science and Technology (NCST)-approved ethics committees (ECs)—the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) and the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC)—and provided to the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) with the clinical trial application. (See the Required Elements section for details on the contents to be included in the form.)

The G-NHSRC and MWI-22 state that the participant or legal representative/guardian must be provided with detailed research study information. Per the G-NHSRC, the ICF content should be presented orally and in writing, in a manner that is easy to understand, commensurate with the comprehension level of the research participants, and without coercion. When drafting and presenting the ICF, special consideration must be taken with regard to the participant’s culture, traditional values, intelligence, and education.

As per the G-NHSRC and MWI-22, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or the legal representative/guardian to waive or appear to waive the participant’s legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representatives from their liabilities for any negligence. The G-BioSampCompense also confirms that researchers must not duly induce participants to participate in any proposed research. Rather, they must design and implement their studies in a manner that calls for the participants’ informed voluntary consent to participate.

Re-Consent

According to MWI-22, the written ICF and any other written information to be provided to participants should be revised whenever important new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s consent. Any revised written ICF and written information should receive the EC's approval/favorable opinion in advance of use. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial. The communication of this information should be documented, and the participant or legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF updates, including a copy of any amendments to the written information provided to the participants.

Language Requirements

As stated in the G-NHSRC and the G-COMREC, the ICF should be written in English and any other relevant local languages that the participant is able to understand.

Documenting Consent

The G-NHSRC and MWI-22 specify that the participant or legal representative/guardian must sign the ICF. The G-NHSRC indicates that where the participant is illiterate, the NHSRC will permit the participant to provide a thumbprint in the presence of a witness, who must also sign the ICF. NHSRC also permits the participant to provide verbal consent in cases where the participant is illiterate. However, the script or information sheet to be read to the potential participant must be approved by NHSRC and signed for by the participant’s legal representative/guardian.

MWI-22 states that where the participant is illiterate or legal representative/guardian is illiterate, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. The witness should sign and date the ICF after the following steps have occurred:

The written ICF and any other written information provided to the participant is read and explained to the participant and the legal representative/guardian
The participant and the legal representative/guardian, have orally consented to the participant’s involvement in the trial, and has signed and dated the ICF, if capable of doing so
Before participating in the study, the participant or legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF.

According to MWI-15, consent forms must be kept for three (3) years after the completion of the investigation, unless otherwise stipulated by the NHSRC.

Waiver of Consent

Per the G-NHSRC, the NHSRC may waive the requirement for the investigator to obtain a signed ICF in cases where circumstances warrant such a waiver. The following conditions may be considered for a waiver:

The research presents no more than a minimal risk of harm to the participants and involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context
The research could not practically be carried out without the consent waiver and obtaining informed consent is not practicable
The consent document is the only link between the participant and the research and the principal risk of harm would come from a breach of confidentiality
The waiver is consistent with the individual’s rights
The G-NHSRC indicates that in lieu of a signed ICF, the NHSRC may require the investigator to provide participants with a written statement regarding the research in the form of an information or fact sheet. This statement should contain, at a minimum:

A statement verifying that the project involves research
A description of the level of involvement and amount of time expected from participants
A description of the study
A description of the risks and benefits to the participants
A statement describing the participant’s rights
A description of the compensation to be provided to participants
Contact information for both the investigator and NHSRC chairperson
Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 provides guidance on the elements to include in the informed consent form (ICF). The G-NHSRC and MWI-22 state that information about the research study should be clearly presented in both written and oral form.

Based on the G-NHSRC, the G-NHSRC-ICF, MWI-22, MWI-13, and MWI-56, the ICF should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study title, purpose, type, procedures, and duration—in lay terms
Experimental aspects of the study
The responsibilities and expected duration of the participant's participation
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
A statement about why the participant was selected to participate
Any expected risks or discomforts to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
Any expected benefits to the participant, others, or to the country as a whole that may reasonably be expected from the research
Description of procedures, including data collection and any audio-recording of interviews or discussions, with an explanation of how recordings will be stored and kept confidential
Identification of any experimental procedures
Disclosure of alternate procedures or treatments available to participants that might be advantageous to the participant
Compensation and/or treatment available for the participant in the case of trial-related injury
The anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
The anticipated expenses, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
That participation is voluntary, and that the participant can refuse to participate or withdraw from the study at any time without penalty or loss of benefits, including medical treatment, to which the participant is otherwise entitled
That the monitor(s), the auditor(s), the ethics committee (EC), and the regulatory authority(ies) will be granted direct access to the participant's original medical records for verification of clinical trial procedures and/or data, without violating the confidentiality of the participant, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and regulations and that, by signing a written ICF, the participant or the participant's legally acceptable representative is authorizing such access
The extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained, including that the participant’s name will not appear in any reports or publications
Name and contact details of institutions that have approved the study
Contact information for the sponsor and investigator in the event of participant problems or trial-related injuries
EC contact information
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without the participant’s consent
The consequences of a participant’s decision to withdraw from the research, and procedures for orderly withdrawal by the participant
That the participant or legal representative/guardian will be notified in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the course of the study which may affect the participant's willingness to continue
Any additional costs to the participant that may result from participation in the research
The site of the study
Consent and signature or thumb print, including a statement that the participant has read (or been read) the information, has had the opportunity to ask questions, has received satisfactory answers, understands the study, and voluntarily agrees to participate, with the last sentence explicitly stating “I voluntarily agree”
Statement from the witness and researcher, with signatures, confirming the consent form was read accurately to the participant, that the participant had the opportunity to ask questions, received satisfactory answers, was not coerced, consented freely and voluntarily, and received a copy of the ICF
See the Vulnerable Populations and Consent for Specimen sections for further information.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Overview

Per the G-NHSRC, Malawi’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. A participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process. Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22), which addresses participant rights.

(See the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.)

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the G-NHSRC and MWI-22, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As delineated in the G-NHSRC and MWI-22, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per the G-NHSRC and MWI-22, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. It is the responsibility of the investigator(s) to safeguard the confidentiality of research data to protect the identity and records of research participants.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The G-NHSRC and MWI-22 state that the research participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries and/or to appeal against a violation of the participant’s rights. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The Malawi government complies with MWI-22 principles that state a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of the participant’s health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 makes provisions to protect the rights of a research participant during the informed consent process when the procedure is complicated by medical emergencies.

Per MWI-22, in an emergency, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) has not been obtained from the research participant or legal representative/guardian, or if an effective treatment is lacking but the investigational product could address the participant’s emergency needs, the clinical trial may be conducted. However, the method used on the participant must be explained clearly in the trial protocol, and the ethics committee (EC) must approve the protocol in advance. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible, and consent to continue and other consent should be requested, as appropriate.

As per the G-NHSRC, a waiver of consent may be justified if the research being conducted could not practically be carried out without the consent waiver, and obtaining informed consent is not practicable. See the Documentation Requirements section for more information on waiver of consent.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Overview

As per the G-NHSRC, in all Malawian clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. The G-NHSRC characterizes vulnerable populations as those who are relatively or absolutely incapable of protecting their own interests due to illiteracy, a lack of education, autonomy, resources, or other necessary attributes. These participants may include children, pregnant women, prisoners, refugees, orphans, sex workers, people living with HIV and AIDS, persons with mental disabilities, and persons in dependent relationships (e.g., some women who culturally must ask their husbands before consenting to participate in a research study).

Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 includes the following as vulnerable populations: members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable populations include persons in nursing homes, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.

The G-NHSRC specifies that National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) members must pay special attention to protecting participants who are from vulnerable populations. Consent for those who are not legally, mentally, and physically able should be sought from their legal representative/guardian in the form of a signature or thumbprint.

As per the G-NHSRC, trials involving vulnerable persons require the research to be directly related to the specific conditions of the vulnerable population involved, and that the participants should personally benefit from the research. In addition, the following elements must be considered when studies are conducted using vulnerable populations:

The methods of recruitment, selection, and inclusion/exclusion criteria, as well as informed consent, data confidentiality, and the participant’s willingness to volunteer
Group characteristics such as economic, social, physical, environmental, and cultural conditions
Applicable local laws that bear on the decision-making abilities of potentially vulnerable participants
Research studies involving potentially vulnerable population groups should have adequate procedures in place for assessing and ensuring participants’ capacity, understanding, and informed consent or assent
Safeguards may include NHSRC monitoring of the consent process where possible
See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
The G-NHSRC states that a minor is a person less than 18 years of age. When the research participant is a minor, assent must be obtained in tandem with permission from the parent/legal guardian.

Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 states that when a clinical trial includes minors, the minors should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with their understanding and, if capable, they should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

Assent Requirements

As per the G-NHSRC, assent must be obtained from a minor who is deemed capable of providing assent. The National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) bases its assessment of a minor’s ability to assent on the minor’s age, maturity, and psychological state. In certain cases, the NHSRC may regard assent by minors to represent informed consent without requiring the permission of a parent/legal guardian. A typical case is when the minors are emancipated, and may include those that are legally married or are university students under the age of 18.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 states that the informed consent form should include a statement on the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
No information available regarding consent requirements for prisoners.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 states that when a clinical trial includes participants with mental impairment (e.g., those with severe dementia), the participants should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with their understanding and, if capable, they should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

The G-NHSRC states that consent for those who are not mentally able should be sought from their legal representative/guardian in the form of a signature or thumbprint.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
As delineated in the D-ImprtRelIMPs and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22), an investigational product (IP) (also referred to as an investigational medicinal product (IMP) in Malawi) is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active substance or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes a product with a marketing authorization when it is used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form, when used for an unauthorized indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use. Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow MWI-22.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Manufacturing

According to the PMRAAct, the D-ImprtRelIMPs, and the G-CTARevVacBiol, the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) (also referred to as an investigational medicinal products (IMPs)) in Malawi.

Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 requires IPs to be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP) and used in accordance with the approved protocol. See MWI-11 for the PMRA’s GMP inspection application form.

Import

As stated in the PMRAAct, the D-ImprtRelIMPs, and the G-ImpExpMP, the PMRA is also responsible for authorizing the import of IPs. Per the PMRAAct and the G-ImpExpMP, the PMRA’s authorization is issued as an import permit. The G-ImpExpMP designates the principal investigator of a registered clinical trial as an authorized importer. IP import permit applications should be made by the pharmacist of record for the trial.

As per the G-CTAProcsVacBiol and the G-CTARevVacBiol, the applicant may apply for an import permit at the same time that the clinical trial application is submitted to the PMRA. (Per MWI-34, the guidance in the G-CTAProcsVacBiol and the G-CTARevVacBiol also apply to clinical trials of drugs.)

The G-ImpExpMP further states that upon receipt of an import application, the PMRA will conduct an assessment to verify whether the requirements, as described in the G-ImpExpMP, have been fulfilled. If the application meets the prescribed requirements, the applicant will be required to pay applicable import permit fees (See the Regulatory Fees section) and the PMRA will issue an import permit. In the case that an application has been rejected, the applicant will be issued a rejection letter (see Annex 2 of the G-ImpExpMP) that clearly states the reason(s) for rejection. The regulatory processing time for an import permit application is 10 working days. The import permit will be valid for six (6) months, not transferable to any other person, and may be extended for a period not exceeding three (3) months upon successful application to the PMRA. For additional information on general import application requirements, see the G-ImpExpMP.

Per the D-ImprtRelIMPs, shipping of IPs should be conducted according to instructions given by or on behalf of the sponsor in the shipping order. A pre-clearance inspection should be carried out at the port of entry by the PMRA. The sponsor must complete the cover sheet contained in Annex 1 of the D-ImprtRelIMPs for the importation and release of IPs. Please note: Malawi is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (MWI-3), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see MWI-35.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Investigator's Brochure

In accordance with the G-CTAProcsVacBiol and the G-CTARevVacBiol, the Malawi government requires the sponsor to provide investigators with an Investigator’s Brochure (IB). Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). MWI-22 specifies that the IB must contain all of the relevant information on the investigational product(s) (IPs) (also referred to as investigational medicinal products (IMPs) in Malawi) obtained through the earlier research phases, including preclinical, toxicological, safety, efficacy, and adverse event data. The sponsor should also update the IB as significant new information becomes available.

As specified in MWI-22, the IB must include the following sections:

Table of Contents
Summary
Introduction
Physical, Chemical, and Pharmaceutical Properties and Formulation
Nonclinical Studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects in Humans (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; and regulatory and post-marketing experiences)
Summary of Data and Guidance for the Investigator(s)
See MWI-22 for detailed content guidelines.

Quality Management

MWI-60 requires that an Investigational Medicinal Product Dossier (IMPD) or alternative be submitted in the clinical trial application to the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA). The IMPD must include information on the quality of any IP, the manufacture and control of the IP, and data from non-clinical studies and from its clinical use.

As per the G-CTAProcsVacBiol, the G-CTARevVacBiol, and the D-ImprtRelIMPs, the PMRA requires the following documents to accompany the IP (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Evidence of manufacture under conditions compliant with current good manufacturing practice (GMP)
A release of specifications and tests, including a Certificate of Analysis (CoA) for each batch of IPs, as well as comparator(s), if applicable
A copy of the PMRA’s letter of approval of the clinical trial
Batch release certificate
A copy of a valid Certificate of Manufacture issued by the competent authority in the country of origin
A copy of a valid World Health Organization certificate of a pharmaceutical product issued by the competent authority in the country of origin
The D-ImprtRelIMPs states that the CoA should identify the product name or code; the sponsor/company name; batch numbers; expiration dates; date of issue; signature, qualification, and title of responsible person; and the results of physical and analytical tests. Per MWI-22, the sponsor must maintain a CoA to document the identity, purity, and strength of the IP(s) to be used in the clinical trial.

The sponsor should complete the cover sheet in Annex 1 of the D-ImprtRelIMPs, include it with each IP shipment, and use the checklist in Annex 2 to ensure the required documentation is attached. As delineated in the D-ImprtRelIMPs, the sponsor should also prepare IP shipping instructions, including information about the shipment’s overall physical condition, for PMRA review and approval. The sponsor should provide information on the acceptable storage temperatures and storage conditions.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Malawi must comply with the requirements set forth in the D-ImprtRelIMPs. The D-ImprtRelIMPs states that for an IP to be used in a clinical trial, it must be properly labeled in the official language of the country where the trial is being conducted.

As set forth in the D-ImprtRelIMPs, the following labeling information must be included on the outer packaging or on the immediate packaging when there is no outer packaging:

Wording that clearly indicates the IP is clinical trial material
Product name or unique code
Storage temperature and conditions
Expiration date
Sponsor contact details
Additionally, the G-ImpExpMP provides the following minimum labeling requirements for all imported medicines and/or active pharmaceutical ingredient (API):

The information printed on labels must be indelible, engraved, or embossed on a primary and secondary container
The immediate outer packaging of the medicine or API should be clearly labeled in English
The trade or brand name where applicable should be stated
The International Non-Proprietary Name (INN, generic name) should be clearly stated
Quantities of each API in the given formulation or quantities of the raw material stated
Date of manufacture and expiry or retest date in case of active raw materials
Batch or lot number
Storage conditions
Name and address of manufacturer
Registration number of the product issued by the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) in both outer and inner package of the product(s) where applicable
Enclosed and accompanying literature must be in English
The specification of the API is given according to officially recognized pharmacopoeia, where applicable
Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). The D-ImprtRelIMPs and MWI-22 state that the IP must be coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

Per MWI-25, clinical trials in Malawi are required to follow the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22). As defined in the D-ImprtRelIMPs and MWI-22, the sponsor must also supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the investigational product(s) (IP(s)), including the comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable. The sponsor should not supply either party with the IP(s) until after obtaining Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) and ethics committee approvals.

The D-ImprtRelIMPs and MWI-22 indicate that IPs must be suitably packaged in a manner that will prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage. Additionally, the sponsor must ensure the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

IP product quality and stability over the period of use
IP is manufactured according to any applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP)
Proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP(s)
Records are maintained for document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP(s)
Acceptable storage temperatures, conditions, and times for the IP
Timely delivery of the IP(s)
Written procedures are established, including instructions for handling and storage of the IP(s), adequate and safe receipt of the IP(s), dispensing of the IP(s), retrieval of unused IP(s), return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor, and disposal of unused IP(s) by the sponsor
Sufficient quantities of the IP(s) are maintained to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary
Refer to the D-ImprtRelIMPs for detailed sponsor-related IP requirements.

In addition, the PharmG-InvestDrugs states that the pharmacist at each clinical trial site, designated as the Pharmacist of Record, is the primary individual who is expected to develop and maintain an IP control system, which includes the technical procedures for product ordering, control, dispensing, and accountability. In addition, the Pharmacist of Record is responsible for the establishment of internal policies and procedures for the safe and proper use of IPs. The Pharmacist of Record will perform the day-to-day dispensing and accountability activities. A pharmacy plan must be created by the Pharmacist of Record for each clinical research site, addressing the control and use of IPs. See the PharmG-InvestDrugs for more information.

Record Requirements

In accordance with the D-ImprtRelIMPs, the sponsor is required to maintain a system for retrieving IP(s) and document this retrieval process (e.g., for deficient product recall, reclaim after trial completion, expired product reclaim). The sponsor must also maintain a system for the disposition of unused IP(s) and for the documentation of this disposition. Finally, the sponsor should maintain sufficient quantities of the IP(s) used in the trial to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary, and maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics. Moreover, to the extent stability permits, samples should be retained either until the analyses of the trial data are complete or as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), whichever represents the longer retention period.

G-GMP-MWI requires that for IPs, the batch documentation must be retained for at least five (5) years after the completion or formal discontinuation of the last clinical trial in which the batch was used. Additionally, the G-ImpExpMP indicates that upon issuance of import authorization by the PMRA, the importer is expected to retain such records for five (5) years from the date of importation, either as hard or electronic copies. Stored import records should be easily accessible and availed for review to the PMRA’s inspector/officers for any post-import audit or investigations.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
In Malawi, as per the G-StorExptSpecimens, specimens are defined as human or animal materials, collected directly from humans or animals, including, but not limited to excreta, secreta, blood and its components; tissue and tissue fluid swabs; and body parts being transported for purposes such as research and investigational activities.

Specimens are also referred to as human materials or biological products. The G-StorExptSpecimens defines human material as all biological material of human origin, including organs, tissues, bodily fluids, teeth, hair, nails, and substances extracted from such material as DNA or RNA.

Please refer to G-StorExptSpecimens for more specific definitions for selected terms including genetically modified micro-organisms and infectious substances.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
Import/Export

As delineated in the G-CTAProcsVacBiol, MWI-14, and MWI-7, the applicant must obtain approval from the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) to import and export human biological specimens into and out of Malawi. The G-CTAProcsVacBiol notes that the applicant may apply to the PMRA for permission to import and/or export materials at the same time that the applicant submits the clinical trial application.

The G-StorExptSpecimens specifies that the sponsor is responsible for shipping specimens, for preparing the required documentation (e.g., nationally authorized import/export permits and dispatch/shipping documents), and for ensuring that the samples collected from research participants are sent through the appropriate carrier to their destination. The sponsor may delegate these functions to the principal investigator (PI). Refer to Annex 1 of the G-StorExptSpecimens for a checklist to be completed by the PI for the proper storage and export of clinical trial samples. As per the G-StorExptSpecimens, the transport of specimens is subject to regulation by the International Air Transport Association.

In cases where investigators are unable to complete all required research tests in Malawi, MWI-14 and MWI-7 state that justification must be provided for the importation and exportation of samples.

Per the G-GenResReqs, the National Health Sciences Research Committee (NHSRC) requires investigators who wish to export biological/genetic materials to apply for a transfer under a material transfer agreement (MTA) that must be reviewed, approved, and signed for by NHSRC. The investigator must provide a satisfactory description of how the privacy and confidentiality of the individuals and communities and the safety of such materials will be maintained. Furthermore, an investigator is not permitted to transfer biological/genetic material to another research group locally and internationally unless NHSRC has approved a collaborative study between the two (2) parties and the material and information provided protects the participants. Additionally, as stated in the SciTechOrder, an NCST-issued license is required for the collection, storage, and use of human samples for research. The SciTechOrder does not specify whether the process of obtaining an NCST-issued license is separate from the NHSRC requirements described above.

Material Transfer Agreement

MWI-14, MWI-16, and MWI-7 indicate that the PMRA, the NHSRC, and the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC) must ensure a MTA is in place that includes the following:

Intention of the importation and exportation of samples
Duration and location of storage
Appropriate informed consent authorizing the exportation and importation of samples
Person(s) who will have access to the samples
The controlling officer of the samples
Ownership of the samples
Capacity building (only applicable for MWI-7)
See MWI-14, MWI-16, and MWI-7 for the PMRA, NHSRC, and COMREC MTA forms, respectively.

The G-BioSampCompense also confirms that MTAs remain an instrument to be used by a researcher in requesting the approval of an ethics committee (EC) for the transfer of samples for analysis outside of Malawi.

Other Considerations

According to the G-GenResReqs and MWI-6, COMREC and NHSRC-approved samples can be stored for a maximum of five (5) years during which time all tests/analyses approved for that particular study should be concluded. MWI-6 further states that if the sample is to be used beyond five (5) years, an updated authorization must be provided, which will last another five (5) years before it can be renewed. Per G-BioSampCompense, while samples are primarily allowed to be stored as long as they are needed for the initial study, leftover samples are also permitted to be stored as long as needed for a research endeavor. See G-BioSampCompense for additional details regarding EC approval requirements.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 7, 2025
In accordance with the G-StorExptSpecimens, the G-NHSRC, the G-HlthResConduct, and MWI-6, prior to collecting, storing, or using a research participant’s specimen(s), written consent must be obtained from the participant and/or the legal representative(s), and investigators should comply with internationally accepted ethics guidelines for specimen collection and handling. The G-BioSampCompense also confirms that consent must be obtained.

As per the G-GenResReqs, the G-StorExptSpecimens, and the G-NHSRC, a clear explanation and justification for the collection and import/export of specimens must be provided. The investigator(s) are responsible for clarifying to the participant and the legal representative(s) how the sample is to be used, and how the research results might affect their interests. MWI-60 also recommends that the clinical trial protocol submitted to the Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) include plans for collection, laboratory evaluation, and storage of specimens for genetic or molecular analysis in the current trial and for future use in ancillary studies, if applicable.

The G-StorExptSpecimens states that consent must also be obtained for sample storage and potential future use.

Per G-BioSampCompense, while samples are primarily allowed to be stored as long as they are needed for the initial study, leftover samples are also permitted to be stored as long as needed for a research endeavor. In addition, researchers may use secondary samples with permission of the samples’ custodial entity and if the study receives ethics committee (EC) approval. See G-BioSampCompense additional details regarding EC approval requirements.

Further, the G-GenResReqs, the G-NHSRC, and MWI-6 state that all forms of studies and testing designed to collect and store biological specimens for future unspecified genetic research/analyses, including any scientific retrospective genetic analyses, is not permitted. The G-BioSampCompense also confirms that researchers are not allowed to collect human biological samples for undefined research with the intention of storage for unspecified future use. Furthermore, it states that commercialization of human biological samples is prohibited.

Per the G-NHSRC, investigators should also avoid collecting excess specimens from participants. (See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent).

The G-GenResReqs states that the investigator(s) must obtain written consent for human genetic research from the participant and the legal representative(s). The informed consent form must include statements on what is being studied and why; details about study procedures; known risks, discomforts, and benefits; and alternatives to participation. In addition, the sponsor or the investigator(s) is required to provide the participant(s), the community(ies), or the tribe(s) with detailed information on how their privacy will be protected, and how the confidentiality of obtained information will be maintained. See the G-GenResReqs for consent requirement details.

Requirements
(Legislation) Data Protection Act, 2024 (No. 3 of 2024) (G-DataPrtct-MWI) (Effective June 3, 2024 per Government Notice No. 39)
Parliament
(Legislation) Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority Act, 2019 (No. 9 of 2019) (PMRAAct) (Effective October 1, 2019 per Government Notice No. 69)
Parliament
(Legislation) Science and Technology Act, 2003 (No. 16 of 2003) (SciTechAct) (November 14, 2008)
Parliament
(Regulation) National Policy Measures and Requirements for the Improvement of Health Research Co-ordination in Malawi (R-HlthResCoord) (Revised Edition) (November 2012)
National Commission for Science and Technology
(Regulation) Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (Fees and Forms) Regulations, 2022 (PMRAFeesRegs) (April 8, 2022)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) COMREC Research Proposal Format (COMREC-Format) (Date Unavailable)
College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences
(Guidance) Directive for Importation and Release of Investigational Medicinal Products (D-ImprtRelIMPs) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) General Guidelines on Health Research College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC) (G-COMREC) (September 29, 2010)
College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences
(Guidance) Guidance on Importation and Exportation of Medicinal Products and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (G-ImpExpMP) (Effective November 2023)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines for Review/Evaluation of Clinical Trial Applications for Vaccines and Biologicals in Malawi (G-CTARevVacBiol) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy, Medicines and Poisons Board
(Guidance) Important Elements in an Informed Consent Form (G-NHSRC-ICF) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Sciences Research Committee
(Guidance) National Policy Requirement and Guidance for the Provision of Insurance Cover for Research Participants in Clinical Trials in Malawi (G-CTInsurance-MWI) (Revised 2nd Edition) (December 2012)
National Commission for Science and Technology
(Guidance) Pharmacy Guidelines for Investigational Drugs and Pharmacy Plan (PharmG-InvestDrugs) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Pharmacy, Medicines and Poisons Board Good Manufacturing Practices Guidelines (G-GMP-MWI) (2013)
Pharmacy, Medicines and Poisons Board
(Guidance) Policy Requirements, Procedures, and Guidelines for the Conduct and Review of Human Genetic Research in Malawi (G-GenResReqs) (September 2012)
National Health Sciences Research Committee
(Guidance) Procedures for Review/Evaluation of Clinical Trial Applications for Vaccines and Biologicals in Malawi (G-CTAProcsVacBiol) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy, Medicines and Poisons Board
(Guidance) Regulatory Requirements on Storage and Export of Samples/Specimens Collected from Participants/Clinical Trial Subjects during Clinical Trials for Testing (G-StorExptSpecimens) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy, Medicines and Poisons Board
(Guidance) Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) Reporting Manual for Clinical Trials in Malawi (G-SAEs-PMRA) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Summary of Procedures and Guidelines for the Conduct of Health Research in Malawi (G-HlthResConduct) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Sciences Research Committee
(Guidance) The National Health Sciences Research Committee General Guidelines on Health Research (G-NHSRC) (December 2007)
National Health Sciences Research Committee
(Circular) Circular on Human Biological Samples and Participants Recompense in Research Involving Human Subjects (G-BioSampCompense) (August 22, 2019)
National Commission for Science and Technology
(Order) Science and Technology (Prescribed Activities) Order, 2024 (SciTechOrder) (July 5, 2024)
National Commission for Science and Technology
Additional Resources
(Guidance) Clinical Trial Compensation Guidelines (MWI-21) (November 12, 2014)
Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry
(Guidance) Insurance and Compensation in the Event of Injury in Phase I Clinical Trials (MWI-20) (2nd Edition) (June 2012)
Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry, BioIndustry Association, and Clinical Contract Research Association
(Article) The Kamuzu University of Health Sciences: A “Semi” New University is Born in Malawi (MWI-62) (June 2021)
Muula, Adamson S.; Malawi Medical Journal
(Document) COMREC Account Details (MWI-43) (Date Unavailable)
College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences
(Document) Informed Consent Form Template for Qualitative Studies (MWI-56) (Date Unavailable)
World Health Organization
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (MWI-3) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) Procedure for Conducting and Reporting GCP Inspections (MWI-61) (Version 1.1) (January 7, 2022)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Document) Research Information Management System (RIMS): Step-By-Step Guide to Make Your Protocol Submissions for Approval to Conduct Research in Malawi (MWI-10) (Date Unavailable)
College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences
(Document) What is the National Regulatory Requirement and Position on Accessing, Collection, Storage and Use of Human Biological Specimen for Research in Malawi? (MWI-6) (Date Unavailable)
National Commission for Science and Technology
(Handbook) Personal Data Protection Handbook (MWI-64) (August 6, 2024)
Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (MWI-42) (October 19, 2013)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Good Clinical Laboratory Practice (‎GCLP)‎ (MWI-30) (2009)
World Health Organization
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MWI-22) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC) (July 2025) (MWI-25)
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) (August 2023) (MWI-34)
(Webpage) Country Profile: Malawi (MWI-35) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) KUHeS - About COMREC (MWI-41) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences
(Webpage) KUHeS - College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (COMREC) – Research Ethics (MWI-40) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences
(Webpage) National Commission for Science and Technology - About NCST (MWI-37) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
National Commission for Science and Technology
(Webpage) National Commission for Science and Technology - Board Composition (MWI-38) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
National Commission for Science and Technology
(Webpage) National Commission for Science and Technology - Functions & Powers of the Commission (MWI-24) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
National Commission for Science and Technology
(Webpage) National Commission for Science and Technology – Contact Us (MWI-57) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
National Commission for Science and Technology
(Webpage) National Commission for Science and Technology – Research Clearance (MWI-26) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
National Commission for Science and Technology
(Webpage) National Health Science Research Committee (NHSRC) (MWI-63) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
National Commission for Science and Technology
(Webpage) Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority - Contact Us - Access to Information (MWI-46) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority – Clinical Trials Oversight (MWI-50) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority – Technical Committees (MWI-36) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority – The Board of Directors (MWI-49) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority – Who We Are (MWI-47) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) Public Health Institute of Malawi – Research Division (MWI-39) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
Public Health Institute of Malawi
(Webpage) Research Ethics Information Management System (REIMS) (MWI-19) (Current as of October 7, 2025)
College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences
Forms
(Form) Application for Authorization to Conduct a Clinical Trial (Form CT 8) (MWI-9) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Form) Application Form: Current Good Manufacturing Practice Inspection (MWI-11) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Form) Application to Conduct Health Research in Malawi (Form 101) (MWI-15) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Sciences Research Committee
(Form) Clinical Trial Annual Progress Reporting Form for Investigators (MWI-58) (Version 1.1) (January 7, 2022)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Form) COMREC Checklist to Accompany New Research Proposals Submitted to the Committee (MWI-1) (Version 3) (September 15, 2019)
College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences
(Form) COMREC Material Transfer Agreement Form on Shipping of Samples (MWI-7) (Version 1) (Date Unavailable)
College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences
(Form) COMREC Progress Report Form (MWI-8) (Date Unavailable)
College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences
(Form) COMREC Request for Amendment/Modification (MWI-44) (Version 1) (Effective November 25, 2007)
College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences
(Form) Consent of Person Who Will Participate in a Clinical Trial (Form CT 9) (MWI-13) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy, Medicines and Poisons Board
(Form) Declaration of Intent, Signed by Contact Person & National Principal Investigator (MWI-31) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Form) Financial Declaration: Joint Declaration by Sponsor (or Representative) and Principal Investigator Concerning Sufficient Funds to Complete Study (MWI-59) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Form) Format for Declarations by Investigators (MWI-32) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Form) Indemnity Form for Conducting Clinical Trials (Form CT 10) (MWI-18) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Form) Material Transfer Agreement Form on Shipping of Clinical Trial Samples (Form CT 11) (MWI-14) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Form) NHSRC Application for Continuing Review (Form 11-01) (MWI-53) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Sciences Research Committee
(Form) NHSRC Checklist (MWI-4) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Sciences Research Committee
(Form) NHSRC Material Transfer Agreement Form (MWI-16) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Sciences Research Committee
(Form) NHSRC Protocol Termination Notification (Form 14-01) (MWI-17) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Sciences Research Committee
(Form) NHSRC Request for Amendment/Modification (Form 10-01) (MWI-52) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Sciences Research Committee
(Form) NHSRC Serious Adverse Event Reporting Form (MWI-2) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Sciences Research Committee
(Form) NHSRC Study Report Submission (Form 15-01) (MWI-54) (Date Unavailable)
National Health Sciences Research Committee
(Form) Power of Attorney (MWI-33) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Form) Serious Adverse Event Form (MWI-12) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
(Form) Submission of a Clinical Trial Application (CTA) to Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority (PMRA) – Checklist (MWI-60) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy and Medicines Regulatory Authority
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 
Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Mali
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
Unspecified
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
No
Clinical trial registration required
No
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
No
Age of minors
Up to 17
Specimens export allowed
Unspecified
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (DPM)

Per DecreeNo2011-753, the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (la Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM)) is the competent authority responsible for regulating clinical trials, examining applications to import investigational drugs, and reviewing clinical trial authorization records for drugs to be registered in Mali. In addition, as stated in LawNo09-059, prior to a clinical trial’s commencement, the DPM must review the clinical trial application research data submitted by the sponsor or principal investigator, as well as the opinion(s) of the ethics committee(s) consulted.

As set forth in DecreeNo2011-753, the DPM is a regulatory body under the Ministry of Health and Social Development (Ministère de la Santé et du Développement Social (MSDS)). An MSDS-appointed director is authorized to direct, coordinate, oversee, and control the directorate’s pharmaceutical activities. LawNo01-040 and Law-MOHOrg also note that the DPM’s mission is to define pharmaceutical regulations, examine and monitor drug marketing authorization dossiers, develop and implement national programs for essential drugs, and create support tools in the rational use of medicines.

DecreeNo2011-753 and OrderNo00-3476 further specify that the DPM consists of three (3) divisions including the Regulation and Monitoring Division of the Practice of the Pharmaceutical Profession (also known as the Medicine Regulation Division), the Quality Assurance and Economics of Medicines Division (also known as the Quality Assurance Division), and the Biomedical Analysis Laboratories Division.

Per DecreeNo2011-753 and OrderNo00-3476, the Regulation and Monitoring Division of the Practice of the Pharmaceutical Profession is responsible for regulating and defining the rules governing market authorization, supervising the procedures for importing, exporting, and placing pharmaceutical products on the market, and managing pharmaceutical product storage, distribution, and destruction.

DecreeNo2011-753 also explains that the Quality Assurance and Economics of Medicines Division coordinates the DPM’s quality assurance procedures, handles the review of clinical trial authorization records, ensures the evaluation and follow up of clinical trials, and manages the development of Mali’s pharmacovigilance program.

Per DecreeNo2017-0245, the DPM must:

Ensure strict compliance with ethical standards, and good clinical and laboratory practices by researchers
Arbitrate between the participants and/or researchers in case of occurrence of offense(s) and/or deviation(s)
Apply the law in force for any offense(s) and deviation(s) from the protocols by the researchers
Other Considerations

Please note: Mali is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (MLI-6), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see MLI-14.

Contact Information

Per MLI-10, the DPM’s contact information is as follows:

Ministry of Health and Social Development
Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (DPM)
Darsalam
BPE 5202
Bamako
Mali

Phone: +223 20 22 24 63 and +223 2022 65 70
Email: info@dirpharma.ml

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Overview

As indicated in DecreeNo2011-753 and MLI-2, the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (la Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM)) within the Ministry of Health and Social Development (Ministère de la Santé et du Développement Social (MSDS)) is responsible for regulating clinical trials, examining applications to import investigational drugs, and reviewing clinical trial authorization records for drugs to be registered in Mali. In addition, as stated in LawNo09-059, prior to a trial’s commencement, the DPM must review the clinical trial application research data submitted by the sponsor or principal investigator, as well as the opinions of the ethics committees (ECs) consulted.

According to LawNo09-059 and the DPM-ClinTrialDocs, the DPM review and approval process takes place after the EC review and approval process. Per LawNo09-059, the EC must communicate its opinion on a research project to the DPM. LawNo09-059 also indicates that the EC’s opinions of the research data must be submitted along with the application to the DPM prior to the agency commencing its review. Therefore, the DPM review and approval process may not be conducted in parallel with the EC review.

Per DecreeNo2017-0245, all clinical research conducted in Mali must benefit the country in general and its local populations.

Clinical Trial Review Process

According to MLI-1, upon receipt of the completed and signed application, the research and evaluation section of the DPM completes the reviewer section of the form (see MLI-1). This section requires the reviewer to provide the following information: date/time of application receipt; file number; reviewer name and signature; date/time, if additional information is requested; date of receipt of additional information requested; date/opinion of the Technical Committee; and any other information.

Per MLI-9, the DPM secretary provides the clinical trial application to the DPM director once it is received. The DPM director then initially assigns the application to either the Medicine Regulation Division or the Quality Assurance Division. The Quality Assurance Division conducts an evaluation once it receives the application. Additional information from the applicant may be requested. Once the division completes its evaluation, it sends the application and evaluation to the Minister of Health and Social Development for final approval and issuance of a certificate. The approval decision is then provided to the applicant as well as regional offices, health professional councils, health inspectors, and all MSDS departments.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (DPM)

According to MLI-1, applicants are required to pay application fees to submit an application to the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (la Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM)). Applicants should contact the DPM for application fee information.

Payment Instructions

No information is available regarding payment instructions.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Overview

As stated in LawNo09-059, Mali requires investigators to obtain approval from a scientific committee and an approved ethics committee (EC) for each clinical trial. The scientific committee evaluates the technical validity of the research protocol. The EC provides its opinion on the validity of the research methods, particularly as they relate to participant protection and consent. Per DecreeNo2017-0245, all clinical research protocols must be submitted to the National Committee of Ethics for Health and Life Sciences (Comité National d’Éthique pour la Santé et les Sciences de la Vie (CNESS)) or to an accredited institutional EC. Furthermore, the EC assumes the moral responsibility of the state and is directed to follow the investigator’s implementation of the protocol at its own expense.

According to MLI-17, Mali’s EC system consists of six (6) committees:

CNESS
Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB) (Comité Institutionnel d'Éthique de la Recherche en Santé et en Sciences de la Vie/Université des Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako)
National Institute of Public Health (Institut National de Santé Publique (INSP)) EC
Ethics Committee for the Center for Sickle Cell Disease Research and Control (le Comité d’Ethique de Centre de Recherche et Lutte Contre la Drépanocytose) (CRLD))
Bamako Dermatology Hospital (Hôpital de Dermatologie de Bamako (HDB)) EC
Alioune Blondin Beye Peacekeeping School (EMP-ABB) of Bamako (l’Ecole de Maintien de la Paix Alioune Blondin BEYE de Bamako) EC
The ClinRegs profile will focus on the CNESS, the CIESS/USTTB, and the INSP EC. Refer to DecreeNo2019-0246 and OrderNo2021-5895 for additional information on the HDB EC, and MLI-19 for additional information on the EMP-ABB EC.

Ethics Committee Composition

National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CNESS)

As specified in DecreeNo02-200 and OrderNo2019-5050, the CNESS consists of 37 members, including a president, a vice-president, and a permanent secretary. The committee’s composition is specifically represented by the following:

Three (3) members nominated by the President of the Republic of Mali
Twenty-seven (27) members from the scientific community selected for their competence and interest in ethical issues
Seven (7) researchers from the research sector, including representatives from the CIESS/USTTB and CRLD
Please refer to DecreeNo02-200 for detailed information on member composition and responsibilities. See also DecreeNo2015-0864 and OrderNo2019-5050 for details on the appointment of the president and a list of CNESS board members.

Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB)

Per D-No2021-0415 and D-No2021-0416, the CIESS/USTTB consists of 14 members appointed by the USTTB rector and chosen from the different departments within the USTTB and from civil society. As indicated in D-No2021-0416, the members specifically include: a forensic pharmacist; an anthropologist/ethicist; an evangelist; an immunologist/genomicist; a parasitologist/clinical research specialist; a pediatrician; a public health professional; an anesthesiologist; an entomologist; a pharmacist/biologist; a pulmonologist; a civil society representative; a jurist; and a chemist.

D-No2021-0415 states that the CIESS/USTTB is presided over by a scientific person appointed by the rector and selected from among the committee members for a period of three (3) years, which is renewable one (1) time. The president is seconded by a vice-president. The CIESS/USTTB may also call upon a competent person with specific expertise to assist the committee in its work.

National Institute of Public Health (INSP) Ethics Committee

OrderNo2019-011 and DecreeNo2019-0247 state that the INSP EC members are appointed by the Minister of Health and Social Development and the committee elects a president from among its members.

As delineated in D-No2020-001817 and OrderNo2019-011, the INSP EC consists of 12 members including a representative of the General Directorate of Health and Public Hygiene; a representative of the Institute of Human Sciences; four (4) representatives of the Minister in charge of Scientific Research; a representative of the High Islamic Council; a representative of the Catholic Church of Mali; a representative of the Association of Groups of Evangelical Protestant Churches and Missions of Mali; a representative of the Malian Human Rights Association; a representative of the National Order of Physicians of Mali; and a representative of communication professionals. Per OrderNo2019-011, the EC may call upon any resource person according to their skills.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

DecreeNo2017-0245 states that the institutions promoting the research and the EC must take necessary measures to minimize conflicts of interest.

National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CNESS)

According to DecreeNo02-200, the CNESS is required to develop standard operating procedures (SOPs) specifying detailed rules for the operation of the committee, the technical committee(s), and the Permanent Secretariat. The Minister of Health and Social Development must approve the SOPs.

Per DecreeNo02-200, the CNESS must convene upon the request of the president. The committee may also meet at the request of a simple majority of its members in sessions, in special sessions, or whenever circumstances require the members to do so. CNESS meetings are not open to the public, and the committee may deliberate only if at least half of its members are present. For additional CNESS procedures and information on other administrative processes, see DecreeNo02-200.

Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB)

As explained in D-No2021-0415, the term of office for CIESS/USTTB members is three (3) years and is renewable one (1) time. Committee membership is free. The president leads the meetings and represents the CIESS/USTTB among various organizations and institutions. When the president is absent, the vice-president performs the president’s duties.

In addition, per D-No2021-0415, the CIESS/USTTB meets whenever necessary, when convened by its president. The president is required to convene the meeting at the written request of two thirds of its members. The committee cannot review proposals without the absolute majority of its members. If a quorum is not reached, the members are reconvened within a period of eight (8) days and the committee’s deliberations are then valid regardless of the number of members present. In addition, per D-No2021-0415, the agenda and the necessary documents are made available to members at least one (1) week prior to the meeting.

D-No2021-0415 further states that consensus is the basic principle governing the functioning of the CIESS/USTTB. If consensus is not reached, the decision may be made by a relative majority vote. The president must have an additional vote if a majority does not emerge. The president may propose that the committee sessions be extended to observers in an advisory capacity.

Additionally, per MLI-17, CIESS/USTTB members are required to take the Human Subjects Research course prepared by the Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) Program and the ICH Good Clinical Practice E6 (R2) course prepared by the Global Health Training Centre.

National Institute of Public Health (INSP) Ethics Committee

As per DecreeNo2019-0247, the INSP EC meets each time as needed, mainly for reviewing protocols submitted for its approval, upon convocation by its president, or at the request of two thirds of its members. The EC members are appointed by the Minister of Health and Social Development for a period of three (3) years and it is renewable.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Overview

According to LawNo09-059, the primary mission of Mali’s ethics committees (ECs) is to ensure the scientific quality and ethical conduct of health research in the country, specifically with regard to participant protection and consent. ECs must act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved by evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants, and by verifying the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards. ECs must also confirm that the study’s goal is to increase scientific understanding of humans and to provide approaches likely to improve the health conditions under consideration. See LawNo09-059 for detailed ethical review guidelines. Per DecreeNo2017-0245, the rights of vulnerable persons, must be particularly protected when they are participating in a study. See also MLI-4 for additional information related to the protection of personal data in biomedical research.

Per MLI-17, all six (6) ECs in Mali follow the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7).

Per MLI-17, Mali’s ECs also require researchers to comply with MLI-7.

National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CNESS)

According to DecreeNo02-200, the National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (Comité National d’Éthique pour la Santé et les Sciences de la Vie (CNESS)) was established by the Ministry of Health and Social Development (Ministère de la Santé et du Développement Social (MSDS)) as an advisory committee on ethical issues raised by advances in knowledge in the fields of medicine, pharmacy, biology, health, and other life sciences, and to make recommendations in these areas.

Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB)

As indicated in D-No2021-0415, the mission of the Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB) (Comité Institutionnel d'Éthique de la Recherche en Santé et en Sciences de la Vie/Université des Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako) is to give opinions on the ethical problems raised by the progress of research in the field of health and life sciences and to make recommendations on these subjects. See the D-No2021-0415 for additional information on the CIESS/USTTB’s responsibilities.

Per the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, in addition to complying with the MLI-7, the CIESS/USTTB complies with the World Health Organization (WHO)’s Good Clinical Research Practices (MLI-3), the Declaration of Helsinki (MLI-16), and any other requirements in force in Mali. (Note: Per MLI-17, the CIESS/USTTB is still using the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs.) Additionally, per MLI-17, the CIESS/USTTB also follows the MLI-7 guidelines.

Per the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, the CIESS/USTTB must also establish a monitoring and evaluation procedure for all research protocols with a favorable decision. This follow-up monitoring should be in effect from the initial decision through the conclusion of the trial.

National Institute of Public Health (INSP) Ethics Committee

Per OrderNo2019-011, the National Institute of Public Health (Institut National de Santé Publique (INSP))’s mission is to set up a health watch system and epidemiological surveillance and to promote health policy and systems research. In accordance with LawNo2019-023, which ratifies OrderNo2019-011, the INSP established an EC as one (1) of its administrative and management bodies. Per OrderNo2019-011, taking into account the socio-cultural context, the INSP EC is charged with giving its opinions on response measures to health threats and crises, research projects and information programs, and education and communication. See also MLI-15 for additional information on the INSP.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

As set forth in LawNo09-059 and the DPM-ClinTrialDocs, EC approval is required prior to obtaining the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (la Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM))’s approval. The EC must communicate its opinion on a research project to the DPM. Further, the sponsor or investigator must send the EC’s opinion with its application to the DPM prior to the agency commencing its review. Therefore, the DPM review and approval process may not be conducted in parallel with the EC review.

Per DecreeNo2017-0245, the EC must notify the investigator of its decision in writing. The CNESS must be informed when an institutional EC, such as the CIESS/USTTB, approves a research protocol. If the protocol is rejected, then the EC must notify other ECs in Mali and the DPM. The investigator may request a reassessment after integrating the feedback and requested changes from the EC. The EC is obliged to consider this request.

Per DecreeNo2017-0245, the EC must also review and approve any protocol amendments prior to those changes being implemented.

Additionally, per DecreeNo2017-0245, the investigator must comply with all decisions and recommendations from the EC. Investigators must also immediately inform the EC of any problems encountered during the course of the study, including deviations from the protocol and complaints from participants. DecreeNo2017-0245 mandates that clinical research must follow good clinical and laboratory practices.

There is no stated expiration date for an EC approval in LawNo09-059, DecreeNo2017-0245, or the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs.

National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CNESS)

According to MLI-17, the CNESS’s EC only participates in the EC review process with the CIESS/USTTB when the research pertains to an emerging infectious disease, such as during the Ebola virus disease outbreak. MLI-17 also notes that the CNESS is responsible for reviewing and approving protocols submitted by the Mali government or protocols of public health importance to the country.

Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB)

MLI-17 indicates that the CIESS/USTTB is the primary EC responsible for reviewing and approving clinical research protocols. Per D-No2021-0415, the CIESS/USTTB is specifically responsible for analyzing and evaluating health research projects in compliance with scientific and ethical principles; deciding on the ethical validity of research protocols submitted for its assessment; and carrying out the mid-term review of approved research protocols and regularly monitoring them in the field to ensure the research is carried out in accordance with the ethical principles.

National Institute of Public Health (INSP) Ethics Committee

According to MLI-17, the INSP's EC only participates in the EC review process with the CIESS/USTTB when the research pertains to an emerging infectious disease, such as during the Ebola virus disease outbreak.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB)

Per the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, the cost to submit a protocol for review by the Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB) (Comité Institutionnel d'Éthique de la Recherche en Santé et en Sciences de la Vie/Université des Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako) is 20,000 West African CFA francs.

However, according to MLI-17, CIESS/USTTB investigators are required to pay a fee of 300,000 West African CFA francs to submit a protocol for EC review and approval.

Payment Instructions

No information is available regarding payment instructions for the CIESS/USTTB.

National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CNESS)

No information is available regarding fees or payment instructions for the National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (Comité National d’Éthique pour la Santé et les Sciences de la Vie (CNESS)).

National Institute of Public Health (INSP) Ethics Committee

No information is available regarding fees or payment instructions for the National Institute of Public Health (Institut National de Santé Publique (INSP)) EC.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Overview

No information is available regarding ethics committee (EC) authorization in Mali. However, per DecreeNo2017-0245, the state, the local authorities, the development partners, and the clinical research promoters provide financing and capacity building for ECs.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

No information is available on registration, auditing, and accreditation.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Overview

In accordance with LawNo09-059 and DPM-ClinTrialDocs, Mali requires the sponsor (also referred to as the promoter in Mali) or the principal investigator (PI) to obtain clinical trial authorization from the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (la Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM)) within the Ministry of Health and Social Development (Ministère de la Santé et du Développement Social (MSDS)). As delineated in LawNo09-059, the investigator is required to obtain approval from a scientific committee and ethics committee (EC) prior to obtaining the DPM’s approval. According to MLI-17, the Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB) (Comité Institutionnel d’Éthique de la Recherche en Santé et en Sciences de la Vie/Université des Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako) is the primary EC for reviewing clinical research protocols in Mali. As per LawNo09-059 and the DPM-ClinTrialDocs, the sponsor or the PI must send the EC’s opinion with its application to the DPM prior to the agency commencing its review. Therefore, the DPM review and approval process may not be conducted in parallel with the EC review. (See the Submission Content section for detailed submission requirements).

Regulatory Submission

As per DPM-ClinTrialDocs and MLI-1, applicants must submit an application for clinical trial authorization. DPM-ClinTrialDocs states that one (1) hard copy of the application should be submitted with a commitment signed by the sponsor along with one (1) hard copy of each of the clinical trial application documents. However, MLI-1 indicates that two (2) copies of the application file should be submitted in paper format along with one (1) copy in electronic format (specifying CD or USB drive). MLI-1 further explains that the application file consists of three (3) parts:

Letter of request addressed to the Minister of Health (template provided)
Admissibility and receipt of the application file (consisting of a Checklist to be completed by the applicant and the DPM, and a Receipt box to be completed by the DPM’s research and evaluation section)
Application form (to be completed by the applicant)
Per MLI-9, there are no guidelines on the format of the clinical trial application or proposed protocol amendments.

There is no specified language requirement for all the documents to be submitted to the DPM. However, per DPM-ClinTrialDocs, the investigator’s brochure must be provided in French. MLI-1, by comparison, only indicates that the protocol must be written in French. DecreeNo2017-0245 also states that the protocol must be written in French.

Ethics Review Submission

Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB)

According to the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, investigators are required to submit 15 hard copies of the application packet to the CIESS/USTTB. The protocol must be submitted in paper and electronic form and the documents must be in French.

National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CNESS)

No information is available regarding submission procedures for the National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (Comité National d’Éthique pour la Santé et les Sciences de la Vie (CNESS)).

National Institute of Public Health (INSP) Ethics Committee

No information is available regarding submission procedures for the National Institute of Public Health (Institut National de Santé Publique (INSP)) EC.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Regulatory Authority Requirements

As specified in DPM-ClinTrialDocs and MLI-1, the following documentation must be submitted by the sponsor (also known as the promoter in Mali) to the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (la Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM)) (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Completed clinical trial authorization application signed by the sponsor
Copy of the ethics committee (EC) approval of clinical trial protocol
Copy of the clinical trial protocol signed by the sponsor in French
Copy of investigator’s brochure (IB) in French
Copy of insurance contract covering entire trial period
Updated and valid certificate of clinical trial insurance
Declaration forms completed and signed by the investigator(s)
Copy of informed consent form (ICF)
Participant information note/flyer
Statement of commitment signed by the sponsor
Copy of investigators’ curriculum vitaes (CVs)
Certificate(s) of Good Manufacturing Practices for Products issued by the pharmaceutical regulatory authority in the country of manufacture (clinical trial IP, placebo, comparator product, other products used in the clinical trial)
Copy of product stability certificate
Establishment opening certificates and/or authorization certificates of manufacturing laboratories issued by the pharmaceutical regulatory authority of the country of manufacture
Copies of import and/or export requests for investigational products (IPs)
Supporting documents for payment of application fees
Other documents provided (specify)
Per MLI-9, there are no guidelines on the format and content of the clinical trial application or proposed protocol amendments.

Ethics Committee Requirements

Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB)

As per the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, investigators must submit the following documentation to the Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB) (Comité Institutionnel d'Éthique de la Recherche en Santé et en Sciences de la Vie/Université des Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako) in the clinical trial application packet:

Application letter
Application form (dated and signed)
Protocol (dated and in print and electronic form) with supporting documents/annexes
Protocol synopsis (non-technical language, if possible)
Description of research related ethical considerations
Summary of IP (e.g., tolerance, pharmacological, pharmaceutical, and toxicological data) (See Investigational Products topic for detailed coverage of this subject)
Summary of clinical experience acquired to date (e.g., IB, publication(s), and product characteristic summaries)
ICF and other related information for potential participants (See Informed Consent topic for additional information)
Participant compensation information (see Insurance & Compensation section for additional information)
Participant information (e.g., booklet of observations, patient diaries, and questionnaires)
Study insurance policy
Opinion of the Scientific Committee from the applicant institution, if available
Investigators’ CVs (dated and signed) and their percentage of time on the project
Recruitment procedures
Investigator declaration to comply with ethical principles
Decision of previous review by other ECs or regulatory authorities (if applicable)
Budget
See the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs for detailed CIESS/USTTB submission requirements.

National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CNESS)

No information is available regarding submission content for the National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (Comité National d’Éthique pour la Santé et les Sciences de la Vie (CNESS)).

National Institute of Public Health (INSP) Ethics Committee

No information is available regarding submission content for the National Institute of Public Health (Institut National de Santé Publique (INSP)) EC.

Clinical Protocol

Per MLI-17, the clinical study protocol should include the following elements:

Protocol summary
Sponsor information
CVs of key personnel and their level of effort within the project
Budget
Trial schedule rationale
Recruitment and enrollment process
Informed consent process
Procedures
Compensation
Risks and benefits
Event grading and reporting
According to DecreeNo2017-0245, the protocol must be written in an easy-to-understand language and comply with international standards. It must also describe the conditions for obtaining the free and informed consent of research participants. Per MLI-17, Mali’s ECs require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7).

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Overview

Per LawNo09-059 and the DPM-ClinTrialDocs, the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (la Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM))’s review and approval of a clinical trial application is dependent upon obtaining written proof of the ethics committee (EC) approvals. Therefore, the DPM review and approval process may not be conducted in parallel with the EC review.

Regulatory Authority Approval

Per MLI-9, the DPM Quality Assurance Division has set the timeline for evaluating applications at 15 days, but there are no guidelines stipulating specific timelines for review. The DPM secretary provides the clinical trial application to the DPM director once it is received. The approval decision is provided to the applicant as well as regional offices, health professional councils, health inspectors, and all Ministry of Health and Social Development (Ministère de la Santé et du Développement Social (MSDS)) departments.

Ethics Committee Approval

Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB)

As specified in the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, the investigator must submit a request to the Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB) (Comité Institutionnel d’Éthique de la Recherche en Santé et en Sciences de la Vie/Université des Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako) President at least 15 days before the date of the EC’s meeting to review the protocol. The CIESS/USTTB will then acknowledge receipt of the application and will inform the investigator if the application is complete. The CIESS/USTTB will complete its review of the protocol within a minimum period of 15 days. Only those members who attended the meeting or communicated their opinion at the meeting are permitted to be involved in the decision-making process. The decision will be one (1) of the following: approved, conditional approval (modifications/response to stipulations), or rejected.

The FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs further states that in the event the president is requested to provide an urgent protocol review (referred to as a restricted review), then the evaluation is conducted according to the same review process used by the EC, but involves only six (6) committee members specifically selected for their expertise in a particular research area. In this case, the decision made by the restricted review committee is communicated to the rest of the EC during the next session. The investigator is notified in writing about the committee’s decision within seven (7) business days.

National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CNESS)

No information is available regarding timeline of review for the National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (Comité National d’Éthique pour la Santé et les Sciences de la Vie (CNESS)).

National Institute of Public Health (INSP) Ethics Committee

No information is available regarding timeline of review for the National Institute of Public Health (Institut National de Santé Publique (INSP)) EC.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Overview

According to LawNo09-059 and DPM-ClinTrialDocs, a clinical trial can only commence after the sponsor (also known as the promoter in Mali) or the principal investigator (PI) receives authorization from the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (la Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM)) within the Ministry of Health and Social Development (Ministère de la Santé et du Développement Social (MSDS)). According to LawNo09-059, the investigator is also required to obtain approval from a scientific committee and ethics committee (EC) prior to obtaining the DPM’s approval.

Per DecreeNo2017-0245, the research must also meet the following conditions:

Benefit the country in general and the people concerned
Be conducted by a person and/or team qualified with reference to their scientific skills proven in the field
Meet the criteria of good clinical practice and internationally recognized laboratories
Respect the habits and customs recognized locally
Respect national and international standards
In addition, per MLI-17, the applicant is required to obtain an import license from the DPM which approves the protocol and forwards the EC letter to the MSDS, also noting that all of the protocol requirements have been met and approved. The MSDS, in turn, signs the clinical trial approval letter and approves the import license for the shipment of an investigational product to be used in the trial (See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information).

Clinical Trial Agreement

Per DecreeNo2017-0245, national sponsors are required to have a written undertaking of acceptance and collaboration of the team leader of each institution where the research activities take place.

The DPM-ClinTrialDocs also states that before the trial begins, the sponsor(s) should sign the protocol and a statement of commitment to comply with ethical principles. Per MLI-1, prior to initiating the trial, the sponsor should also sign the statement of commitment in the application form for clinical trial authorization (see MLI-1) certifying the accuracy of the information provided in the application; that the trial will comply with the protocol, Malian regulations, and good clinical practice (GCP) principles; and that unexpected serious adverse effects will be declared along with submitting safety reports and a final clinical trial report to the DPM.

In addition, according to the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), the sponsor should obtain the investigator's/institution's agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with GCP guidelines, the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and the approved protocol
Comply with procedures for data recording/reporting
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain the trial-related, essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution these documents are no longer needed
The sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement.

Clinical Trial Registration

No clinical trials registry exists at this time and there is no stated requirement to register in an international registry.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Safety Reporting Definitions

According to OrderNo2011-4201 and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), the following safety reporting definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Mali’s safety reporting requirements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) or Adverse Reaction (AR): All harmful and unintended responses to a medicinal product related to any dose
Adverse Event (AE): Any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical investigation participant who was administered a pharmaceutical product and that does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)/Serious Adverse Effect or Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR): Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose results in death, is life-threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or is a congenital anomaly/birth defect
Severe Adverse Effect: Effect requiring, in addition to discontinuation of the drug, additional care
Moderate Adverse Effect: Effect that is neither serious nor severe
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction or Unexpected Adverse Reaction: An adverse reaction, the nature or severity of which is not consistent with the applicable product information or summary of product characteristics concerned
Per MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees (ECs) follow and require researchers to comply with MLI-7.

OrderNo2011-4201 established the procedures for implementing pharmacovigilance via Mali’s National Pharmacovigilance System. The system includes the National Pharmaceutical Regulatory Authority (ANRP), the National Pharmacovigilance Reference Center (CNRP), and several advisory bodies. The ANRP is represented by the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (la Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM)), which is responsible for ensuring compliance with pharmacovigilance operating standards and procedures; transmitting to the manufacturing laboratory the information concerning the undesirable effects of health products, and more. The CNRP is responsible for carrying out technical pharmacovigilance activities and is concerned with the safety of using medicinal products in order to verify facts reported by the notifications received. (See OrderNo2011-4201 for additional details).

Safety Reporting Requirements

As specified in the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, all SAEs/SADRs that occur during the study must be reported to the Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB) (Comité Institutionnel d’Éthique de la Recherche en Santé et en Sciences de la Vie/Université des Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako) within 72 hours of the event. All AEs/ADRs and non-serious AEs/ADRs should be identified in the continuing review report.

OrderNo2011-4201 further delineates the following reporting obligations:

Any doctor, dental surgeon, midwife, or health agent with prescribing responsibility who has observed an AE likely to be due to a health product, whether or not the responsible party is the prescriber, must report it immediately to the CNRP
Any pharmacist who becomes aware of an undesirable effect likely to be due to a health product that has been delivered must declare it immediately to the Pharmacovigilance Committee of the district to which the pharmacist belongs
Any member of a healthcare profession having made the same observation must also inform the nearest Pharmacovigilance Committee
The pharmaceutical industry and any producer or distributor of a health product are required to declare any undesirable effect relating to the products they market
Anyone who has had an AE can report to the health worker and/or the nearest health structure
Sponsor Responsibilities

Per the DPM’s application form for clinical trial authorization in Mali (MLI-1), the sponsor (also known as the promoter in Mali) is required to declare unexpected serious adverse effects and to submit safety reports in accordance with the regulations in force in Mali.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

No information is available regarding form completion and delivery requirements.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

No information is available regarding progress reporting requirements for the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (la Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM)).

However, DecreeNo2017-0245 notes that if the study lasts longer than one (1) year, an annual report must be provided to the ethics committee (EC).

According to MLI-17, Mali’s ECs follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which also explains that the investigator should promptly provide written reports to the sponsor and the institutional EC on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial and/or increasing the risk to participants.

In addition, as delineated in the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, the principal investigator (PI) must submit an annual progress report to the Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB) (Comité Institutionnel d’Éthique de la Recherche en Santé et en Sciences de la Vie/Université des Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako).

Final Report

Per MLI-1, the sponsor (promoter) is required to submit a final clinical trial report to the DPM no later than one (1) year after the end of the trial.

Per the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, the PI must submit a final report to the CIESS/USTTB following the trial’s conclusion.

In addition, per DecreeNo2017-0245, researchers must provide the results of the research in the form of a workshop, final report, and/or a publication. In addition, a copy of the final report must be provided to the EC, which the committee must keep for at least 10 years. DecreeNo2017-0245 also states that Malian sponsors must inform the national authorities of the research results.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
As per LawNo09-059, a sponsor (also referred to as a promoter in Mali) is defined as a natural or legal person, an institution, or an organization that supports research through the initiation or financing of a clinical trial.

According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which also specifies that a sponsor-investigator is an individual who both initiates and conducts, alone or with others, a clinical trial, and under whose immediate direction the investigational product is administered to, dispensed to, or used by a participant. The term does not include any person other than an individual (e.g., it does not include a corporation or an agency). The obligations of a sponsor-investigator include both those of a sponsor and those of an investigator.

MLI-7 also notes that a sponsor may transfer any or all of its trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO) and/or institutional site(s). However, the ultimate responsibility for the trial data’s quality and integrity always resides with the sponsor. Any trial-related responsibilities transferred to a CRO should be specified in a written agreement. The CRO should implement quality assurance and quality control.

Per DecreeNo2017-0245, a sponsor may be domestic or foreign. Per MLI-17, an in-country representative is not required.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Overview

As set forth in LawNo09-059, the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical research study, taking into account the appropriateness and availability of the study site and facilities. When the research is to be conducted in one (1) or more public or private institutions, the sponsor or the principal investigator (PI) is required to inform the director(s) of these institutions prior to initiating the study.

Per DecreeNo2017-0245, all members of the research team must be properly trained on the needs of the research as well as in research ethics. The sponsoring institution must do the following:

Ensure the training of staff who participate in the conduct of biomedical research
Require researchers to disclose their conflicts of interest in advance
Have the conflict-of-interest declarations reviewed by an ethics committee (EC) and, where appropriate, make adjustments
In addition, DecreeNo2017-0245 mandates that clinical research must follow good clinical practices. According to MLI-17, Mali’s ECs follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which provides guidance to sponsors on investigator and site selection. According to MLI-7:

The sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s)/institution(s). Each investigator should be qualified by training and experience and should have adequate resources to properly conduct the trial for which the investigator is selected. If the organization of a coordinating committee and/or the selection of coordinating investigator(s) are to be utilized in multicenter trials, their organization and/or selection are the sponsor's responsibility.
Before entering an agreement with an investigator/institution to conduct a trial, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the protocol and an up-to-date Investigator's Brochure and should provide sufficient time for the investigator/institution to review the protocol and the information provided.
Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

DecreeNo2017-0245 further states that international sponsors are required to:

Take charge of the scientific and ethical evaluation of biomedical research protocols
Ensure that the proposed biomedical research is compatible with the ethical, regulatory, and national legal systems
Provide financial, documentary, and other assistance with a view to promoting the strengthening of ethical evaluation capacity
Develop reasonable and appropriate activities so that the results can be made available to participants
Help to define specific policies and procedures to encourage the integrity of biomedical research and to serve as a guide in case of allegations or evidence of scientific misconduct
In addition, per MLI-17, a foreign sponsor is not required to use a local representative or contract research organization.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

MLI-7 notes that a Data Safety Monitoring Board may be established to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial.

Multicenter Studies

LawNo09-059 notes that a research coordinator should also be appointed to coordinate activities of investigators working on the same project in different centers.

As delineated in MLI-7, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and the EC approval provided
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication among investigators is facilitated
Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Insurance

According to LawNo09-059, DecreeNo2017-0245, and DPM-ClinTrialDocs, the sponsor is required to carry a valid insurance policy for the expected duration of the study for any unforeseen injury to research participants. The LawNo09-059 specifically states that in the case of biomedical research on human beings, the sponsor (also referred to as a promoter in Mali) must take out an insurance policy guaranteeing the civil liability of the sponsor and all involved parties, regardless of the nature of the relationship between the parties and the sponsor. Furthermore, a sponsor whose civil liability is not guaranteed by an insurance policy is at risk of being imprisoned for one (1) to six (6) months and/or fined 300,000 to 1,000,000 West African CFA francs.

In addition, MLI-1 indicates that an updated and valid certificate of clinical trial insurance should be included in the application submission package (see MLI-1 for the application form).

Compensation

Injury or Death

According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees (ECs) follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which provides guidance for sponsors on how to compensate research participants in the event of trial-related injuries or death. The sponsor must explain to participants the compensation and/or treatment available to them in the event of trial-related injuries.

As specified in LawNo09-059 and the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, the sponsor is responsible for providing compensation to participants in the event of trial-related injuries or death.

Per LawNo09-059, in the case of biomedical research without direct benefit to the participant, the sponsor must provide compensation to the injured participant and indemnify liable parties for any harmful consequences as a result of the research, regardless of whether the sponsor is at fault. In the case of biomedical research with direct benefit to the participant, the sponsor must provide compensation to the injured participant and indemnify liable parties, unless proof is provided verifying that the trial-related injuries are not attributable to the sponsor or that of any intervening party. In either scenario, the sponsor is not permitted to oppose the legal claims of a third party (including the trial participant) or the voluntary withdrawal of the participant who had initially consented to the research.

Trial Participation

Per LawNo09-059 and the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, the participant may also be reimbursed for expenses incurred in connection with participating in the study. However, per LawNo09-059, in the case of commercial benefit of a research study, the sponsor must negotiate patronage dividends for the community being studied.

Post-Trial Access

DecreeNo2017-0245 requires the researcher to ensure that the local community has access to post-study benefits after the trial’s conclusion.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees (ECs) follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which provides details on quality, data, and records management. Per MLI-7, the sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, focusing on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that includes:

During protocol development, identifying processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results
Identifying risks to critical trial processes and data
Evaluating the identified risks against existing risk controls
Deciding which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept
Documenting quality management activities and communicating to those involved in or affected by these activities
Periodically reviewing risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant
In the clinical study report, describing the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarizing important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken
Monitoring Requirements

Per MLI-7, the sponsor should develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The extent and nature of monitoring is flexible and permits varied approaches that improve effectiveness and efficiency. The sponsor may choose on-site monitoring, a combination of on-site and centralized monitoring, or where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan).

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

LawNo09-059 states the sponsor must inform the Ministry of Health and Social Development (Ministère de la Santé et du Développement Social (MSDS)) of any premature termination of the investigation and explain the reason for this decision. The FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs also specifies that in the case of suspension or termination of the study, the investigator must inform the Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB) (Comité Institutionnel d'Éthique de la Recherche en Santé et en Sciences de la Vie/Université des Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako) within 72 hours and provide reasons for this decision.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Electronic Data Processing System

According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees (ECs) follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7). Per MLI-7, when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor must ensure that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. The sponsor's approach to validating such systems should be based on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use and the potential of the system to affect participant protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, the sponsor should maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) for the systems that cover system setup, installation, and use. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the system users should be provided with training. Refer to MLI-7 for additional information.

Records Management

As set forth in LawNo09-059, the sponsor and the investigator must record, process, and maintain research information in such a manner as to permit the presentation of complete and accurate research reports and to facilitate their interpretation and verification.

Per MLI-7, sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application, until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications, or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of the investigational product’s clinical development. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed.

In addition, MLI-7 states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Responsible Parties

For the purposes of data protection regulation in Mali, the Mali-DPL delineates responsibilities for the “data controller.” The data controller is defined as any person who, alone or jointly with others, makes the decision to collect and process data of a personal character and determines its purposes. A “subcontractor,” in turn, is defined as any natural or legal person, public or private, or any other body or association that processes data on behalf of the data controller.

Data Protection

Per the Mali-DPL, the law provides conditions under which personal information may be gathered and processed. The data controller must ensure that all of the necessary precautions are taken to preserve the security of the personal data being collected. In particular, the data controller must prevent the data from being distorted, damaged, or accessed by unauthorized third parties. The authorities who are legally empowered within the framework of a particular investigative mission, such as the judicial authority, the judicial or control police, may ask the controller to communicate personal data to them. The data controller’s subcontractor must also present sufficient guarantees to ensure the implementation of security and confidentiality measures. This requirement does not exempt the data controller from the obligation to ensure compliance with these measures.

The Mali-DPL further explains that the collection and processing of personal data must comply with the following principles:

Be collected and processed in a fair, lawful, and non-fraudulent manner for specific, explicit, and legitimate purposes
Not be used for other purposes
Be adequate, proportionate, and relevant to the purposes for which they are collected or used
Be accurate, complete, and, if necessary, updated
Be kept in a form identifying the persons concerned only for the period needed to serve the purposes for which they are collected or used
These provisions do not preclude the conservation and use of data processed for archival management purposes or for historical, statistical, or scientific purposes in accordance with the procedures defined by law.

See also MLI-4 for additional information related to the processing of personal data in biomedical research.

For additional information about consent, see the Documentation Requirements and Required Elements sections.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

As delineated in the Mali-DPL, a data participant’s consent is defined as any expression of explicit, unequivocal, free, specific, and informed will by which the person concerned or the person’s legal, judicial, or contractual representative, accepts that their personal data be processed.

Mali-DPL also provides a definition for sensitive personal data that encompasses health-related considerations. Sensitive data is defined as any personal data relating to religious, philosophical, political, union, sexual, or racial opinions or activities, as well as health, social measures, prosecutions, criminal, or administrative sanctions. Processing related to sensitive data is prohibited because of the risk of discrimination and infringement of individual rights and freedoms.

However, per Mali-DPL, sensitive data may be processed with the appropriate guarantees as defined by the authority in charge of personal data protection, if the processing is necessary or is implemented to safeguard the life of the data participant or of a third party, when the data participant cannot give consent, due to legal incapacity or material impossibility.

Mali-DPL further explains that when personal data is collected directly from a data participant, during the collection and regardless of the means and media used, the data controller must provide the data participant with the following information:

The data controller’s identity, and where applicable, the representative’s identity
The determined purpose(s) of the processing for which the data is intended
The categories of data concerned
The recipient(s) or categories of recipient(s) to whom the data is likely to be communicated
Whether the answer is compulsory or optional as well as the possible consequences of a lack of response
Whether the data participant can ask to no longer be included in the file
The existence of a right of access to the data concerning the data participant and the rectification of this data
The data retention period
The planned transfers of personal data to foreign countries, where applicable
Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Obtaining Consent

In all Malian clinical trials, a freely given, written informed consent is required to be obtained from each participant in accordance with the principles set forth in LawNo09-059 and DecreeNo2017-0245. In addition, DecreeNo2017-0245 mandates that clinical research must follow good clinical practices. According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees (ECs) follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7).

As per the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, DecreeNo2017-0245, and MLI-7, the informed consent form (ICF) and patient information sheet(s) are essential documents that must be reviewed and approved by the EC and provided to the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (la Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM)) for approval with the clinical trial application. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.)

LawNo09-059, DecreeNo2017-0245, and MLI-7 state that the investigator or the physician who represents the participant must provide detailed research study information to the participant or the legal representative/guardian. Per DecreeNo2017-0245, in order to provide consent, the participant must have previously received and understood all necessary information on the proposed research and have reached a decision without coercion, influence, undue inducement, or intimidation.

In addition, per DecreeNo2017-0245, the participant's involvement in clinical research must be strictly voluntary. The refusal to participate in clinical research, or the desire to withdraw from the study at any time, must not cause any harm to the participant or the loss of expected benefits.

Per MLI-7, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or the legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive the participant’s legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representatives from their liabilities for any negligence.

Re-Consent

No information is available regarding re-consent requirements.

Language Requirements

The FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs requires the ICF to be presented in written form in the language that the potential participant is able to understand. Per DecreeNo2017-0245, the ICF must also be translated into the language of the person whose consent is required, under the responsibility of the investigator or the legal representative/guardian.

Documenting Consent

LawNo09-059, DecreeNo2017-0245, and MLI-7 state that the participant must sign the ICF. However, per LawNo09-059, if it is not possible for the participant to do so, the participant’s consent may be recorded or filmed. A participant’s consent must be obtained in the presence of a third party who is completely independent of both the investigator(s) and the sponsor. In addition, where biomedical research is carried out on minors or prohibited adults with either direct individual benefit or without direct individual benefit, and the research does not present a serious foreseeable risk, consent must be provided by the legal representative/guardian of these participants.

MLI-7 states that where the participant is illiterate or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. The witness should sign and date the ICF after the following steps have occurred:

The written ICF and any other written information to be provided to the participant is read and explained to the participant and the legal representative/guardian
The participant and legal representative/guardian, have orally consented to the participant’s involvement in the trial, and has signed and dated the ICF, if capable of doing so
Before participating in the study, the participant or the legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF.

Waiver of Consent

No information is available regarding waiver of consent requirements.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees (ECs) follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7). Based on LawNo09-059, DecreeNo2017-0245, and MLI-7, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study purpose, the procedures, the duration of the trial, and the enrollment conditions
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
The participant’s responsibilities and the expected duration of participation
Experimental aspects of the study
Any expected risks to the participant, including if the study is prematurely concluded. Risks should not be minimized. If applicable, risks to the embryo, fetus, or nursing infant should be described.
Explanation of the compensation and/or medical treatment available in case of adverse events that occurred during the study
Any expected benefits to the participant; benefits should not be exaggerated; it should be made clear when there is no intended clinical benefit
A description of other possible benefits for the participant and/or community, whether or not related to participation
That participation is voluntary, and that the participant can withdraw from the study at any time without liability and without detriment to the overall scientific quality of the results
In the case of withdrawal, the participant may request the withdrawal
Any compensation provided for time spent participating in the study
Any anticipated expenses for participating in the study
The contact information for the EC, the principal investigator, and any organization or person to be contacted regarding the clinical research and the participant's rights
That the monitor(s), the auditor(s), the EC, and the regulatory authority(ies) will be granted direct access to the participant's original medical records for verification of clinical trial procedures and/or data, without violating the confidentiality of the participant, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and regulations and that, by signing a written ICF, the participant or the participant's legally acceptable representative is authorizing such access
The extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained
That the participant or the legal representative/guardian will be notified in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the course of the study that may affect the participant's willingness to continue
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without their consent
Approximate number of participants involved in the study
Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Overview

As delineated in LawNo09-059 and DecreeNo2017-0245, a participant’s rights must be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process. According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which addresses participant rights.

(See the Required Elements; Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Prisoners sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.)

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in LawNo09-059, DecreeNo2017-0245, and MLI-7, the participant should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time without liability and without detriment to the overall scientific quality of the results.

The Right to Information

As delineated in LawNo09-059, DecreeNo2017-0245, and MLI-7, a potential research participant has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, and any potential compensation, benefits, risks, or constraints. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

Per DecreeNo2017-0245 and MLI-7, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. It is the responsibility of the investigator(s) to safeguard the confidentiality of research data to protect the identity and records of research participants.

See also MLI-4 for additional information related to the protection of personal data in biomedical research.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

Per DecreeNo2017-0245 and MLI-7, the research participant or the legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries and/or to appeal against a violation of the participant’s rights. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Safety and Welfare

DecreeNo2017-0245 and MLI-7 principles state that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of their health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
LawNo09-059 makes provisions to protect the rights of a research participant during the informed consent process when the procedure is complicated by medical emergencies. According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees (ECs) follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which addresses consent in the case of medical emergencies.

As per LawNo09-059 and MLI-7, the EC may approve emergency medical research when informed consent cannot be obtained from the participant. The investigator must submit a protocol for the EC’s approval that requires only the consent of the participant’s legal representative/guardian, if they are present. The participant should be informed about the research as soon as possible, at which time consent will be requested.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Overview

In all Malian clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. LawNo09-059 states that biomedical research may only be carried out on persons incapable of giving consent or those who are unable to give consent due to restricted freedom, if consent is provided by their legal representative/guardian, and they will benefit individually or collectively from participating in the study.

According to LawNo09-059, these participants may include minors and adults incapable of giving their consent and under guardianship, pregnant women or women of childbearing age, persons deprived of their freedom, persons staying in a health or social institution, and patients in emergency situations.

DecreeNo2017-0245 mentions the following as vulnerable persons: pregnant or breastfeeding women, persons deprived of liberty, persons unable to express themselves with full cognizance, and minors.

According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which includes the following as vulnerable populations: members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable populations include persons in nursing homes, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.

Per LawNo09-059, if a study is to be conducted without direct benefit to the participant(s), the research must comply with the following conditions:

Present no serious and foreseeable health risks
Be useful to people with the same age, illness, or disability characteristics
Provide results that cannot be achieved otherwise
See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Prisoners sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
DecreeNo2017-0245 states that the rights of participants who are minors must be particularly protected. According to MLI-17, Mali’s definition of a child/minor and the age of consent refers to individuals up to 17 years of age.

Per LawNo09-059, minors may be solicited for biomedical research only if they can benefit individually or collectively.

In accordance with LawNo09-059, when the research participant is a minor with either direct individual benefit or without direct individual benefit, their parent/legal guardian most provide consent. In addition, the research must not present a serious foreseeable risk to participants who are minors.

In addition, per LawNo09-059, if a study is to be conducted without direct benefit to participant(s) who are minors, the research must comply with the following conditions:

Present no serious and foreseeable health risks
Be useful to people with the same age, illness, or disability characteristics
Provide results that cannot be achieved otherwise
According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which states that when a clinical trial includes minors, the minor should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with their understanding and, if capable, the minor should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

Assent Requirements

No information is available regarding assent requirements.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
DecreeNo2017-0245 states that the rights of participants who are pregnant or breastfeeding must be particularly protected.

As per LawNo09-059, any Malian clinical studies involving a woman of childbearing age or one who is pregnant may only be conducted if the benefits of the research outweigh the risks to the woman and her embryo, her fetus, or her child.

According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which states that the informed consent form should include a statement on the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
While there is no information available specifically regarding prisoner consent requirements, DecreeNo2017-0245 states that the rights of participants deprived of liberty must be particularly protected.

According to LawNo09-059, persons deprived of liberty may only be solicited for biomedical research if they are expected to receive a direct and major benefit for their health.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
DecreeNo2017-0245 states that the rights of participants unable to express themselves with full cognizance must be particularly protected.

According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which states that when a clinical trial includes participants with mental impairment (e.g., those with severe dementia), the participant should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with their understanding and, if capable, the participant should sign and personally date the written informed consent.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which defines an investigational product as a pharmaceutical form of an active substance or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes a product with a marketing authorization when it is used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form, when used for an unauthorized indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Manufacturing

According to DPM-ClinTrialDocs, the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (la Direction de la Pharmacie et du Médicament (DPM)) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) in Mali. The DPM reviews the manufacture of an IP as part of its review and approval of the clinical trial application. (See the Submission Process section for detailed application requirements).

According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees (ECs) also follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which requires IPs to be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP) and used in accordance with the approved protocol.

DecreeNo2017-0245 further mandates that clinical research must follow good clinical practices. In addition, as specified in MLI-1, the sponsor (also known as the promoter in Mali) must provide the following documentation to the DPM in the clinical trial application submission package:

Certificate(s) of GMPs for products issued by the pharmaceutical regulatory authority in the country of manufacture (Clinical trial IP, placebo, comparator product, other products used in the clinical trial)
Establishment opening certificates and/or authorization certificates of manufacturing laboratories issued by the pharmaceutical regulatory authority of the country of manufacture (see MLI-1 for application)
Import

According to MLI-17, the Ministry of Health and Social Development (Ministère de la Santé et du Développement Social (MSDS)) is responsible for authorizing the import of IPs in Mali. Once the DPM receives the EC approval letter, it reviews and forwards the letter to the MSDS, noting that the protocol has met all of the requirements and is approved. The MSDS, in turn, signs the clinical trial approval letter and approves the import license prior to product shipment. Per DPM-ClinTrialDocs, the import license is valid for six (6) months. (See the Scope of Assessment section for more details on the clinical trial application review process). Per MLI-1, the sponsor must also provide copies of import and/or export requests for IPs to the DPM in the clinical trial application submission package (see MLI-1 for application).

Please note: Mali is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (MLI-6), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see MLI-14.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Investigator’s Brochure

According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees (ECs) follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which provides detailed Investigator’s Brochure (IB) requirements. MLI-7 specifies that the IB must contain all of the relevant information on the investigational products (IPs) obtained through the earlier research phases, including preclinical, toxicological, safety, efficacy, and adverse event data. The sponsor should also update the IB as significant new information becomes available.

As specified in MLI-7, the IB must include the following sections:

Table of Contents
Summary
Introduction
Physical, Chemical, and Pharmaceutical Properties and Formulation
Nonclinical Studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects in Humans (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; and regulatory and post-marketing experiences)
Summary of Data and Guidance for the Investigator(s)
See MLI-7 for detailed content guidelines.

Quality Management

MLI-7 requires IPs to be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP).

Per MLI-7, the sponsor must also maintain a Certificate of Analysis to document the identity, purity, and strength of the IP(s) to be used in the clinical trial.

In accordance with the FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs, an applicant must also provide the Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research (CIESS)/University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB) (Comité Institutionnel d'Éthique de la Recherche en Santé et en Sciences de la Vie/Université des Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako) with the following IP information in the clinical trial application submission:

An adequate summary of all tolerance, pharmacological, toxicological, and pharmaceutical data available on the IP to be evaluated
A summary of the clinical experience to date with this IP (e.g., recent IB, publication(s), and summarized product characteristics)
Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which states that the investigational product be coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

According to MLI-17, Mali’s ethics committees (ECs) follow and require researchers to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7), which provides guidance on investigational product (IP) management. Per MLI-7, the sponsor must supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the IP(s), but not until approval is obtained from the Ministry of Health and Social Development (Ministère de la Santé et du Développement Social (MSDS)) and an EC.

The sponsor must ensure the following:

IP product quality and stability over the period of use
IP manufactured according to any applicable Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP)
Proper coding, packaging and labeling of the IP(s)
Records maintained for document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP(s)
Acceptable storage temperatures, conditions, and times for the IP
Timely delivery of the IP(s)
Written procedures including instructions for handling and storage of the IP(s), adequate and safe receipt of the IP(s), dispensing of the IP(s), retrieval of unused IP(s), return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor, and disposal of unused IP(s) by the sponsor
Maintain sufficient quantities of the IP(s) to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary
Additionally, per MLI-7, the IPs must also be suitably packaged in a manner that will prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage.

Record Requirements

Per MLI-7, the sponsor should comply with the following records requirements:

Maintain records that document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP(s)
Maintain a system for retrieving IPs and documenting this retrieval (e.g., for deficient product recall, reclaim after trial completion, and expired product recovery)
Maintain a system for the disposition of unused IP(s) and for the documentation of this disposition
Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
No applicable requirements

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
No applicable requirements

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: December 5, 2024
Per DecreeNo2017-0245, during the informed consent process, the participant must be informed that withdrawal is possible at any time, and that the withdrawal of the participant’s data and biological material may also be requested.

Requirements
(Legislation) Law No. 01-040/of June 7, 2001 – Ratifying Order No.00-039/P-RM of September 20, 2000 Creating the Pharmacy and Medicines Directorate (LawNo01-040 - French) (June 7, 2001)
Republic of Mali
(Legislation) Law No. 09-059/of 28 December 2009 Governing Biomedical Research on Humans (LawNo09-059 - French) (English-LawNo09-059 - Unofficial translation) (December 28, 2009)
Republic of Mali
(Legislation) Law No. 2013-015 of May 21, 2013 on the Protection of Personal Data in the Republic of Mali (Mali-DPL - French) (English-Mali-DPL – Google Translation) (May 21, 2013)
Republic of Mali
(Legislation) Law No. 2019-023/of 3 July 2019 - Ratifying Order No. 2019-011/P-RM of 27 March 2019 Establishing the National Institute of Public Health (INSP) (LawNo2019-023 - French) (July 3, 2019)
Republic of Mali
(Legislation) The Mandates of the Actors and Bodies in Health Development: The 2009 Organization Chart of the Ministry of Health (Law-MOHOrg - French) (English-Law-MOHOrg – Google Translation) (Last Updated April 22, 2009)
Ministry of Health and Social Development
(Regulation) Decision No. 2020-001817/MSDS-SG of 18 November 2020 - Appointing the Ethics Committee Members of the National Institute of Public Health (INSP) (D-No2020-001817 - French) (November 18, 2020)
Ministry of Health and Social Development
(Regulation) Decision No. 2021-0415/USTTB-R/SG-SAJE - On the Establishment, Organization and Operation of the Institutional Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences Research of the University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (D-No2021-0415 - French) (December 23, 2021)
Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research; University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako
(Regulation) Decision No. 2021-0416/USTTB-R/SG-SAJE - Establishing the Institutional Ethics Committee Member List for Health and Life Sciences Research of the University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (D-No2021-0416 - French) (December 23, 2021)
Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research; University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako
(Regulation) Decree No. 02-200/P-RM of 22 April 2002 - Establishing the National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (DecreeNo02-200 - French) (English-DecreeNo02-200 - Unofficial translation) (April 22, 2002)
Council of Ministers
(Regulation) Decree No. 2011-753/P-RM of 17 November 2011 - Establishing the Organization and Operating Methods of the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (DecreeNo2011-753 - French) (English-DecreeNo2011-753 - Google Translation) (November 17, 2011)
Council of Ministers
(Regulation) Decree No. 2015-0864/P-RM of 31 December 2015 - Appointing the President of the National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (DecreeNo2015-0864 - French) (English-DecreeNo2015-0864 - Google Translation) (December 31, 2015)
President of the Republic
(Regulation) Decree No. 2017-0245/P-RM of 13 March 2017 - Establishing the Terms of Application of Law No. 09-059 of December 28, 2009 Governing Biomedical Research on Humans (DecreeNo2017-0245 - French) (English-DecreeNo2017-0245 - Google Translation) (March 13, 2017)
Council of Ministers
(Regulation) Decree No. 2019-0246/P-RM of 27 March 2019 - Establishing the Organization and Operating Methods of the Bamako Dermatology Hospital (DecreeNo2019-0246 - French) (March 27, 2019)
President of the Republic
(Regulation) Decree No. 2019-0247/P-RM of 27 March 2019 – Establishing the Organization and Operating Methods of the National Institute of Public Health (DecreeNo2019-0247 - French) (English-DecreeNo2019-0247 – Google Translation) (March 27, 2019)
President of the Republic
(Regulation) Rules of Procedure of the FMPOS Ethics Committee (FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs - French) (English-FMPOS-USTTB-ECProcs - Unofficial translation) (January 14, 2012)
Faculty of Medicine of Pharmacy and Odontostomatology
(Guidance) Documents to be Provided for a Clinical Trial (DPM-ClinTrialDocs - French) (English-DPM-ClinTrialDocs - Unofficial translation) (July 3, 2014)
General Secretariat, Department of Pharmacy and Medicine, Ministry of Health and Social Development
(Order) Order No. 00-3476/Ms-Sg - Setting Out the Details of the Organization of the Sections of the Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (OrderNo00-3476 - French) (English-OrderNo00-3476 - Google Translation) (December 29, 2000)
Ministry of Health and Social Development
(Order) Order No. 2019-011/P-RM - Creating the National Institute of Public Health (OrderNo2019-011 - French) (English-OrderNo2019-011 - Google Translation) (March 27, 2019)
Ministry of Health and Social Development
(Order) Order No. 2019-5050/MSAS-SG of 31 December 2019 - Amending the Nominative List of Members of the National Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (OrderNo2019-5050 - French) (December 31, 2019)
Ministry of Health and Social Development
(Order) Order No. 2021-5895/MSDS-SG of 31 December 2021 - Appointing the Members of the Institutional Ethics Committee of the Bamako Dermatology Hospital (HDB) (OrderNo2021-5895 - French) (December 31, 2021)
Ministry of Health and Social Development
(Order) Order No. 2011-4201/MS-SG OF 14 October 2011 - Setting the Methods for Implementing Pharmacovigilance (OrderNo2011-4201 - French) (October 14, 2011)
Ministry of Health
Additional Resources
(Article) Ethics and Protection of Personal Data in Biomedical Research (MLI-4 – French and English) (April-June 2023)
Haidara, Mahamadou Aly; Economics and Society Review
(Article) Factors Influencing the Regulation of Clinical Trials in Mali (MLI-2 - French) (English-MLI-2 - Google Translation) (Winter 2011)
Maïga, Diadié; Lamothe, Lise; Williams-Jones, Bryn; and Blais, Régis; Governance Review
(Document) Assessment of DPM Medicine Regulatory System, Mali (MLI-9) (October 2017)
Kikule K., S. Diarra, A. Sangare, M. Thumm, Systems for Improved Access to Pharmaceuticals and Services (SIAPS) and US Agency for International Development (USAID)
(Document) Handbook for Good Clinical Research Practice (GCP): Guidance for Implementation (MLI-3) (2005)
World Health Organization
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (MLI-6) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) Validation Workshop of the Project to Create the Scientific Committee of Alioune Blondin Beye Peacekeeping School (EMP-ABB) of Bamako (MLI-19 - French) (English-MLI-19 - Google Translation) (April 2022)
EMP-ABB News
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (MLI-16) (October 19, 2013)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MLI-7) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Not Available Online) NIAID Correspondence with the CIESS/USTTB (November 2024) (MLI-17)
(Webpage) Country Profile: Mali (MLI-14) (Current as of December 5, 2024)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine (MLI-10 - French) (Current as of December 5, 2024)
Ministry of Health and Social Affairs
(Webpage) National Institute of Research in Public Health: BP 1771 Bamako - Mali (MLI-15 - French) (Last Updated January 18, 2024)
Geneva Foundation for Medical Education and Research (GFMER)
Forms
(Form) Application Form for Clinical Trial Authorization in Mali (MLI-1 - French) (English-MLI-1 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicine
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 
Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Mexico
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
Spanish
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
No
Clinical trial registration required
Yes
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
Yes
Age of minors
Under 18
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS)

As set forth in GenHlthLaw, Reg-COFEPRIS, HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, and COFEPRIS-GCP, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) is the regulatory authority responsible for approving all clinical studies in human beings and/or their biological samples, for scientific research purposes. COFEPRIS is authorized to monitor and verify approved clinical studies to be conducted in Mexico in accordance with the provisions of the aforementioned documents.

Under the terms of Reg-COFEPRIS and GenHlthLaw, the Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud) supervises the regulation, control, and promotion of health through COFEPRIS. Per MOH-Org, COFEPRIS, a decentralized administrative body, reports directly to the head of the Ministry of Health. Reg-COFEPRIS and GenHlthLaw state that COFEPRIS is headed by a Federal Commissioner appointed by the President of Mexico, upon the Ministry’s recommendation. Per GenHlthLaw, the Ministry of Health is also responsible for supervising COFEPRIS. Per Reg-COFEPRIS and GenHlthLaw, the agency has technical, administrative, and operational autonomy in regulating, evaluating, controlling, promoting, and disseminating the conditions and requirements to prevent and manage health risks in the Mexican population.

Reg-COFEPRIS specifies that COFEPRIS comprises eight (8) administrative units and four (4) government advisory bodies that manage the agency’s organizational and operational responsibilities. Included among COFEPRIS’s administrative units, and central to the research protocol authorization process, is the Health Authorization Commission (Comisión de Autorización Sanitaria (CAS)). As delineated in Reg-COFEPRIS, GenHlthLaw, and MEX-88, CAS is responsible for issuing, extending, or revoking research protocol authorizations. According to MEX-88, CAS’s work is performed by the Executive Directorate for Product and Establishment Authorization which oversees the Coordination of Clinical Trials Area, that in turn, is responsible for research protocol authorizations. See MEX-88 for an organizational flowchart.

Other Considerations

Per MEX-41, Mexico is a regulatory member of the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). As indicated in MEX-2, COFEPRIS is in the process of implementing the ICH Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6 (R2) (MEX-22). However, COFEPRIS-GCP complies with the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6 (R1) (MEX-32). Additionally, see MEX-85 for 16 ICH efficacy guidelines adopted by COFEPRIS.

Please note: Mexico is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (MEX-5), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see MEX-35.

Contact Information

As per MEX-71, COFEPRIS’s contact information is as follows:

Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios
Oklahoma 14
Col. Nápoles
Demarcación Territorial Benito Juárez
C.P. 03810, Ciudad de México

For general inquiries:

Phone: 55 5080 5200
Email: contactociudadano@cofepris.gob.mx

For technical inquiries:

Call Center (CAT) Phone: 800 033 5050 (toll free within Mexico) or 55 53 40 09 96 (international calls) (per MEX-37)

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Overview

In accordance with GenHlthLaw, Reg-COFEPRIS, HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, and COFEPRIS-GCP, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) is the regulatory authority responsible for reviewing, evaluating, and approving all requests for research protocol authorization in human beings and/or their biological samples using registered or unregistered investigational products (IPs). Per NOM-257-SSA1-2014, COFEPRIS requires biotechnological drugs used in clinical research studies to follow the same protocol authorization procedure as is required for all IPs. COFEPRIS-GCP and HlthResRegs specify that the scope of COFEPRIS’s assessment includes all clinical trials (Phases I-IV). (Note: COFEPRIS refers to applications as requests or procedures and refers to official procedure codes as homoclaves).

As indicated in HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, COFEPRIS’s review and approval of a protocol authorization request is dependent upon obtaining a favorable decision from the health institution’s Research Ethics Committee (REC) and Research Committee where the study is being conducted, and when applicable, the Biosafety Committee. Therefore, the COFEPRIS and EC reviews may not be conducted in parallel. In addition, per NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the REC’s favorable decision is only later submitted to COFEPRIS with the protocol authorization request. Refer to the Ethics Committee section for detailed information on the REC, and the Initiation, Agreements & Registration section for additional information on the Research Committee and Biosafety Committee.

Clinical Trial Review Process

As delineated in GenHlthLaw, Reg-COFEPRIS, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts, and MEX-88, COFEPRIS’s Health Authorization Commission (Comisión de Autorización Sanitaria (CAS)) is responsible for issuing, extending, or revoking requests for human research protocol authorizations. According to Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts, G-HumResProt, MEX-88 and MEX-104, CAS’s technical review and approval of research protocol submissions and amendments are managed through COFEPRIS’s digital procedures and services platform, DIGIPRiS: Online Regulation (MEX-86). See MEX-104 for a flowchart of CAS’s review and approval process via MEX-86.

Per Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, which simplifies COFEPRIS’s administrative review process, requests for human research protocol authorization have been merged into a single procedure, the Application for Authorization of a Research Protocol on Human Beings (Homoclave COFEPRIS-04-010). The merged requests include those for medicines, biologicals, and biotechnologicals; medications (bioequivalence studies); new non-pharmacological medical methods or materials; and risk-free research (observational studies).

Agrmnt_ResProtProcs and G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts specify that protocol modification applications (Homoclave COFEPRIS-09-012) must be submitted to CAS to amend the underlying documents including the research protocol, the investigator’s brochure (also known as researcher’s manual in Mexico), and the informed consent/assent form. Other types of amendments include: the inclusion of research centers, research center address and/or name changes, principal investigator (PI) changes, research team changes, emergency center address and/or name changes, evaluation committee changes (REC, Research Committee, or Biosafety Committee), security amendment(s), authorization holder (or owner) address and/or name changes, sponsor address and/or name changes, importer change or addition, and other modifications. See Agrmnt_ResProtProcs and MEX-87 for additional information.

As indicated in G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts, CAS will begin its evaluation process once the applicant submits an application via DIGIPRiS (MEX-86) to request protocol authorization or to modify/amend a protocol authorization. The stages involved in this process are as follows:

Request (user submits an authorization application request under Homoclave COFEPRIS-04-010 or COFEPRIS-09-012)
Evaluation (CAS reviews and processes the application)
Verification (CAS verifies the draft resolution to confirm whether to approve, deny, or request additional information)
Signature (CAS signs the resolution)
Resolution (Signed resolution is released to the user)
G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts and G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts further note that once COFEPRIS issues an official authorization, some of the data provided by an applicant via DIGIPRiS (MEX-86) is automatically migrated to its National Registry of Clinical Trials (Registro Nacional de Ensayos Clínicos (RNEC v2.0)) database (MEX-68). Per MEX-88, MEX-68 was integrated into MEX-86 as RNEC v2.0. See Submission Process section for detailed DIGIPRiS (MEX-86) submission requirements.

(Note: COFEPRIS has not yet updated MEX-84, G-ResProtocolAmd, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts to align with the Agrmnt_ResProtProcs requirements. However, the ClinRegs team is regularly monitoring the COFEPRIS website for new developments and will post the most current sources when they become available.)

In addition, per Reg-HlthProd, applicants must submit a request to COFEPRIS to obtain a health registration for biosimilar biotechnological drug products. The specific requirements for the approval of each biosimilar biotechnological drug (e.g., in vitro studies, preclinical study reports, and comparative pharmacokinetic study reports) will be determined by the Ministry of Health, who will take into consideration the opinion of the Committee of New Molecules. When there is no relevant information in the Pharmacopoeia of the United Mexican States (Farmacopea de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos (FEUM)) and its supplements, nor in national guides or monographs, the Ministry may evaluate biosimilar tests using clinical data obtained from biosimilar biotechnological drug studies conducted in other countries. However, clinical trials are required to be conducted in Mexico when an applicant requests the renewal of an approval for a biosimilar biotechnological drug product.

Additionally, per NOM-177-SSA1-2013 and NOM-177-SSA1-2013-Mod, COFEPRIS requires interchangeability and biocomparability studies for generic and biosimilar (biocomparable) drugs; these studies maybe conducted in Mexico or in other countries and must be performed by authorized third parties in accordance with applicable testing and procedural requirements. See NOM-177-SSA1-2013, NOM-177-SSA1-2013-Mod, and MEX-120 for details.

Reliance Reviews

Under Agrmnt_FRAAuth, COFEPRIS issued an agreement establishing the list of Foreign Regulatory Authorities (FRAs) and the criteria for recognizing prior FRA authorizations of research protocols involving human beings using the regulatory “reliance” model. In evaluating applications, COFEPRIS will use reliance to consider the regulatory decisions submitted and approved by one (1) of the following FRAs:

European Medicines Agency (EMA)
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), United Kingdom
Health Canada
Agrmnt_FRAAuth also notes that human research protocol applications must only include:

Phase III research protocol submissions
Trials authorized through regulatory processes under an ordinary evaluation scheme (i.e., this does not include trials approved by reliance, accelerated, or expedited methods)
Trials with non-adaptive trial designs or designs that do not allow planned changes or that do not correspond to master protocols
Trials that correspond to the following areas: oncology, endocrinology, cardiology, rheumatology, allergology, neurology, dermatology, pulmonology, gastroenterology, hematology, ophthalmology and nephrology, and/or those that address pathologies of high epidemiological impact in Mexico (e.g., diabetes mellitus, hypertension, lung cancer, melanoma, colon cancer, B cell lymphoma)
Active trials (i.e., trials that are not suspended or cancelled)
Investigational product (IP) trials that do not have special alerts or warnings from other regulatory authorities or the World Health Organization (WHO)
Trials of drugs that have not been withdrawn from the market in any country for reasons of safety, efficacy, and quality
See Agrmnt_FRAAuth the additional details. See also the Submission Process and Timeline of Review sections for information on application submission procedures and review timelines.

UHAP Evaluations

Per HlthResRegs, prior to submitting an authorization request, applicants may also obtain a pre-assessment evaluation by an authorized third party that helps to facilitate COFEPRIS’s review. MEX-21 and MEX-10 explain that rather than submitting the application directly to COFEPRIS, the applicant has the option of first choosing to obtain a pre-assessment (third party) evaluation of the application through an Enabled Pre-Assessment Support Unit (Unidad Habilitada de Apoyo al Predictamen (UHAP)) (MEX-69) within the Coordinating Commission of National Institutes of Health and High Specialty Hospitals (Comisión Coordinadora de Institutos Nacionales de Salud y Hospitales de Alta Especialidad (CCINSHAE)) (referred to as the UHAP-CCINSHAE) or a UHAP within the Mexican Social Security Institute (Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social (IMSS)). MEX-9 states that the CCINSHAE oversees (12) UHAPs. According to MEX-90, the Faculty of Medicine of the Autonomous University of Nuevo León (Facultad de Medicina de Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León (UANL)) UHAP is another third-party unit authorized by COFEPRIS to assist in the evaluation and assessment of human research protocols. Refer to MEX-19, MEX-69, and MEX-70 for detailed information on the CCINSHAE, the IMSS, and the UANL UHAP application submission requirements and evaluation process. See also HlthResRegs for information on the third party authorization process by the Secretariat, and MEX-10 and MEX-98 for additional information on authorized third parties. See Timeline of Review section for timeline information on submitting UHAP applications.

According to MEX-10, the UHAP has a maximum of 30 calendar days to respond to an evaluation request. See the Scope of Assessment and Submission Process sections for detailed UHAP information.

Inspections

As outlined in MEX-88, COFEPRIS carries out health surveillance inspections (known as health verification visits) of all the parties responsible for conducting, developing, and monitoring authorized research protocols (e.g., sponsors, owners/authorization holders, RECs, Research Committees, Biosafety Committees, the PI, research centers, emergency care centers, and contract research organizations). The inspections are intended to:

Confirm compliance with applicable legislative requirements
Obtain information and identify health anomalies in the establishment’s physical and sanitary conditions
Verify the clinical research studies are carried out in accordance with the provisions of authorized research protocols, as well as national and international regulations
Ensure compliance with standards regarding ethics in clinical research, good clinical practice (GCP) and good manufacturing practice (GMP)
Refer to MEX-93 for the verification report health inspectors use to ensure compliance in clinical trial sites. See also MEX-92 for a complete list of verification reports related to medicines and other health supplies.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS)

As indicated in G-HumResProt, G-ResProtocolAmd, MEX-84, G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, the applicant is responsible for paying a non-refundable fee to submit a request for research protocol authorization to the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)).

G-HumResProt, G-ResProtocolAmd, and MEX-11 delineate the following fees (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Research protocol authorization (medicines, biological, and biotechnological in humans): 7,896 Mexican Pesos
Research protocol amendment, modification, or addition of new research centers: 5,922 Mexican Pesos
For health permit authorization, the fees are as follows:

Health permit to import investigational products for research purposes: 7,033.09 Mexican Pesos (G-UnregDrugImprts)
Health permit to import cells and tissues including blood, its components, and derivatives: 866.45 Mexican Pesos (G-ImprtPermit)
Health permit modification to import cells and tissues including blood, its components, and derivatives: 649.84 Mexican Pesos (G-ImprtPermitMod)
Health permit to export cells and tissues including blood, its components, and derivatives: 866.45 Mexican Pesos (G-ExprtPermit)
As indicated in MEX-10, the fee for requesting a pre-assessment application evaluation through an Enabled Pre-Assessment Support Unit (Unidad Habilitada de Apoyo al Predictamen (UHAP)) (MEX-69) within the Coordinating Commission of National Institutes of Health and High Specialty Hospitals (Comisión Coordinadora de Institutos Nacionales de Salud y Hospitales de Alta Especialidad (CCINSHAE)) (referred to as the UHAP-CCINSHAE) is 60,000 Mexican Pesos. The cost is the same for obtaining a review from any of the UHAPs within CCINSHAE. In addition, if the applicant selects a scientific committee within an institution that has a UHAP, the cost is 40,000 Mexican Pesos. The cost for each amendment is 3,500 Mexican Pesos, and corrections to the pre-assessment document are free.

Payment Instructions

As explained in G-HumResProt, G-ResProtocolAmd, G-UnregDrugImprts, G-ImprtPermit, G-ImprtPermitMod, and G-ExprtPermit, fees must be paid to the applicant’s preferred bank. See G-ResProtocolAmd, G-UnregDrugImprts, G-ImprtPermitMod, and MEX-84 for access to a procedure-based form to pay fees at a chosen banking institution.

Refer to G-ResProtocolAmd, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts for additional information on this process.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Overview

As delineated in GenHlthLaw, HlthResRegs, REC-Op, REC-Op-Ref, G-RECs-Op-2018, and NOM-012-SSA3-2012, Mexico has a decentralized process for the ethics review and approval of clinical trial research. Accordingly, every health care institution which carries out research activities in human beings is required to have a Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)) that is responsible for evaluating and ruling on research protocols in human beings. RECs are subject to current legislation and the criteria established by the National Bioethics Commission (Comisión Nacional de Bioética (CONBIOÉTICA)).

RECs must also comply with guidelines for the ethical evaluation of research involving human beings as delineated in GenHlthLaw, G-RECs-Op-2018, HlthResRegs and NOM-012-SSA3-2012. Pursuant to G-RECs-Op-2018, RECs must adhere to international guidelines relevant to research with human beings including the Declaration of Helsinki (MEX-76) and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MEX-22)). (Note: Per MEX-2, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) is in the process of implementing MEX-22).

In addition, per GenHlthLaw, HlthResRegs, and NOM-012-SSA3-2012, every health institution where research is conducted is required to establish a Research Committee and a Biosafety Committee. Per HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, REC and Research Committee approval is required for each trial site where a study is being conducted, and when applicable, Biosafety Committee approval is required as well.

GenHlthLaw further notes that in addition to establishing a REC, public, social, or private sector health care establishments of the National Health System must have a Hospital Bioethics Committee for the resolution of problems arising from medical care along with engaging in other bioethical and ethical related activities.

As per HlthResRegs, REC-Op, REC-Op-Ref, G-RECs-Op-2018, and NOM-012-SSA3-2012, Hospital Bioethics Committees also operate through CONBIOÉTICA. MEX-47 specifies that CONBIOÉTICA is responsible for registering RECs and Hospital Bioethics Committees. See the Oversight of Ethics Committees section for details on ethics committee registration.

Ethics Committee Composition

Research Ethics Committee Composition

As indicated in GenHlthLaw, RECs must be interdisciplinary, gender-balanced groups composed of medical personnel from different specialties; professionals from psychology, nursing, social work, sociology, anthropology, philosophy, or law fields who have bioethics training; and community representatives affected by the health condition under study or other health services users who may or may not be attached to the health unit or institution. In addition to the previously stated criteria, G-RECs-Op-2018 indicates that these professionals should have a professional license and accredited training and experience in research ethics, good clinical practice, bioethics, and have experience related to the research area they will be evaluating. HlthResRegs further notes that the REC must consist of at least three (3) scientists including both genders and recommends that at least one (1) of them be based outside the health institution. The medical professionals should also represent the moral, cultural, and social values of the research groups. By comparison, NOM-012-SSA3-2012 states that REC health professionals should have expertise in the subjects investigated at the institution, regardless of whether the professionals have experience in the scientific methodology applied to the research. Further, the community representatives should embody the moral, cultural, and social values of the research participants.

Per REC-Op and REC-Op-Ref, the REC members must also be recognized and able to document their professional excellence in research/research bioethics, have personal records that prove ethical suitability and conduct, and advanced knowledge in qualitative and quantitative methodology. Additionally, GenHlthLaw, G-RECs-Op-2018, and NOM-012-SSA3-2012 state that REC members may or may not be based at the associated institution where the study is being conducted.

Additionally, NOM-012-SSA3-2012 specifies that the REC should be composed of a minimum of three (3) scientists, plus community representatives, as deemed necessary, with a total of at least six (6) members and a maximum of 20. G-RECs-Op-2018, REC-Op, and REC-Op-Ref note that the REC should comprise a president, at least four (4) members, one (1) of whom will serve as secretary, a representative from the affected study group or other health services users, with at least one (1) member who has expertise in bioethics and research ethics, and internal or external specialists to be included on an as needed basis. G-RECs-Op-2018 also notes that the member acting as a representative is not required to have a professional license in research or medical care and may include individuals with basic education or technical training.

Hospital Bioethics Committee Composition

Per GenHlthLaw and G-CHBs-Op, Hospital Bioethics Committees must be multidisciplinary, diverse, gender-balanced groups composed of medical personnel from different specialties and the health team; professionals from psychology, nursing, social work, sociology, anthropology, and philosophy fields; lawyers with knowledge in health matters, and community representatives affected by the health condition under study or other health services users who may or may not be attached to the health unit or institution. G-CHBs-Op notes that the members must have previous bioethics training or receive the training within six (6) months after joining the Committee. See G-CHBs-Op for additional information.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

Research Ethics Committees

Per NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the constitution and operation of the REC will be subject to the provisions of current legislation and, where appropriate, to the criteria referred to in article 41 Bis of the GenHlthLaw. REC-Op, G-RECs-Op-2018, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, and COFEPRIS-GCP specify that RECs should operate within written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to conduct their reviews. REC-Op and G-RECs-Op-2018 indicate that the health institution owner must approve the SOPs and issue a certificate of appointment to each REC member. HlthResRegs, G-RECs-Op-2018, and NOM-012-SSA3-2012 note that members must hold office for three (3) years and may be approved for an equal period.

Per REC-Op, G-RECs-Op-2018, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, and COFEPRIS-GCP, the following minimum requirements must be met (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

RECs must meet at least six (6) times a year, and at least once every two (2) months
The minimum number of members required to complete a quorum must be greater than 50% of the members, and the president and/or secretary must be present to form a quorum
In the evaluation of multicenter studies and when otherwise warranted, the REC may meet jointly with other RECs that belong to other establishments in the country, for the assessment and opinion for these protocols
Minutes must be prepared for legal and administrative purposes in meetings
An annual activities report should be presented to the institutional head in the first 30 calendar days of the year
Conflicts of interest in protocol evaluations should be avoided or be declared disqualified for that particular review
Participation is required in initial training and bioethics continuing education
Liaisons with other RECs within and outside the country conducted to better carry out its functions
A general policy on the confidentiality of information for reviewed protocols must be established and implemented
A code of conduct for REC members must be established and implemented
Members must refrain from participating in the evaluation and opinion of their own research
Members will remain in office for the time established in each committee’s installation act and may be ratified at the end of each period, if applicable. Members may be replaced in a staggered manner, for which documentary evidence must be kept
The committee will designate the person who will occupy the position of president and who will be responsible to the head of the institution or establishment and for the committee’s activities
In the committee sessions, members of external committees may participate or have the support of external advisors, who will have a voice but no vote. In these cases, researchers from the institution or establishment itself may also participate as long as they work in areas related to the project or research protocol subject in the opinion phase
It is the responsibility of the committee to issue the technical opinion on ethics, according to the nature of the proposed investigations
For detailed REC procedures and information on other administrative processes, see REC-Op, G-RECs-Op-2018, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, and COFEPRIS-GCP. See also MEX-72 for information on CONBIOÉTICA’s REC follow-up monitoring reports.

As per G-RECs-Op-2018, the REC should also keep documentation related to its integration, operation, and registration activities for up to three (3) years after the conclusion of the committee’s activities. The committee should also define the procedure for transferring the files and appoint the responsible person at the institution where the REC registration was granted. In addition, the REC will keep all the essential documents reviewed and related to each evaluated investigation, up to five (5) years following the end of the investigation or during the period established in the applicable provisions.

See G-RECs-Op-2018 for additional REC recordkeeping requirements.

Hospital Bioethics Committees

As indicated in G-CHBs-Op, Hospital Bioethics Committees must establish operating rules, which specify member functions as well as the internal mechanisms and procedures for operations during the sessions. Per G-CHBs-Op and GenHlthLaw, the Committee promotes, with the head of the hospital, the dissemination, elaboration, and implementation of institutional bioethical guidelines and guides for medical care and teaching. GenHlthLaw notes the Hospital Bioethics Committees must comply with current legislation and CONBIOÉTICA guidelines. For detailed Hospital Bioethics Committee procedures and information on other administrative processes, see G-CHBs-Op.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Overview

According to HlthResRegs, REC-Op, and G-RECs-Op-2018, the primary scope of information assessed by the Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)) relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of human research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial. Per HlthResRegs and G-RECs-Op-2018, RECs must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed vulnerable. (See Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations.)

HlthResRegs and G-RECs-Op-2018 also state that RECs must ensure an independent, timely, and competent review of all ethical aspects of the clinical trial protocol. They must act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved by evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants, and they must verify the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards. See HlthResRegs and G-RECs-Op-2018 for detailed ethical review guidelines.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

Per HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, the applicant must obtain a favorable decision from the REC and the Research Committee at the health institution where the study is being conducted, and when applicable, a favorable decision from the Biosafety Committee. As per COFEPRIS-GCP, HlthResRegs, and NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the REC must provide a favorable decision for the research protocol and informed consent form prior to the applicant submitting a request for protocol authorization to the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)). Consequently, the REC and COFEPRIS reviews may not be conducted in parallel.

HlthResRegs and GenHlthLaw, explain that the REC provides ethics recommendations on protocols for research in human beings, including a review of the research risks and benefits. HlthResRegs further notes that RECs also prepare ethics guidelines for conducting research in humans.

As delineated in G-RECs-Op-2018, the REC agenda and documents corresponding to each session should be delivered at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting. It is then recommended that the REC’s decision be sent within a period not exceeding five (5) working days after the committee has met, or if applicable, not to exceed 30 calendar days from the review request date. G-RECs-Op-2018 and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts also state that the approval of a new application is valid for one (1) year.

After obtaining a favorable opinion from the REC that validated the initial project or protocol, per NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the principal investigator (PI) must submit an amended protocol to the Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud) to request a new authorization for any amendments to be made to the methodological design of the initial research project. In those cases where the lives of research participants are endangered, amendments can be applied immediately, prior to approval by the REC and authorization by the Ministry of Health. However, in these situations, it will be necessary for the PI to provide documentary evidence following the event to the REC and the Ministry.

In addition, G-RECs-Op-2018 indicates that the REC should establish procedures for monitoring approved studies, from the point at which the decision was made until the completion of the investigation and reporting of results. Per NOM-012-SSA3-2012 and G-RECs-Op-2018, the REC must assess and approve the research protocol at the beginning of the project, and periodically throughout the project’s duration to ensure conformance with ethical principles and applicable regulations. NOM-012-SSA3-2012 further specifies that the REC must propose to the head of the institution or establishment where health research is carried out that the research be suspended or cancelled in the presence of any adverse effect that is an impediment from an ethical or technical point of view to continue with the study.

(See Submission Process and Timeline of Review sections for detailed REC submission process and timeline details.)

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
As set forth in G-RECs-Op-2018, COFEPRIS-GCP, and REC-Op, Research Ethics Committees (RECs) (Comités de Ética en Investigación (CEIs)) do not charge sponsors/investigators for their review. Rather, the health institution must finance REC operating expenses, without this causing any conflict of interest in the committee’s functions.

G-RECs-Op-2018 further states that the institution may also receive support from external sources for evaluating protocols. However, this funding should not be given directly to any of the REC members, and the contributions should not lead to a conflict of interest between the funding source and the REC’s functions. Similarly, the committee’s evaluations should not result in financial gains as a result of these contributions.

Per G-RECs-Op-2018, REC financial support should not be used for purposes other than for its operation, and all activities should be handled with full transparency. Support is provided for the following activities:

Time for participation in committee meetings
Work recognition for their performance in the REC
Support for training in bioethics and research ethics inside and outside the institution
Physical space for the REC headquarters, both for meetings and receipt of documents, and safeguarding of documentation protocols, opinions, and minutes
Administrative assistance for REC activities
No information is available on Hospital Bioethics Committee fees.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Overview

The National Bioethics Commission (Comisión Nacional de Bioética (CONBIOÉTICA)) was established as a decentralized entity of the Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud) in 2005, as specified in D-CONBIOETICA. According to D-CONBIOETICA and MEX-55, the agency has technical and operational autonomy in defining and establishing national bioethics policies in medical care and health research. Per D-CONBIOETICA, GenHlthLaw, G-RECs-Op-2018, and MEX-57, CONBIOÉTICA is also responsible for promoting the organization and operation of Research Ethics Committees (RECs) (Comités de Ética en Investigación (CEIs)) and Hospital Bioethics Committees in public and private health institutions, for establishing and disseminating criteria to support development of REC activities, and for providing committee member training support.

In addition, per D-CONBIOETICA, CONBIOÉTICA’s other roles include:

Exercising the Commission’s legal authority and head Commission operations
Presiding over the Commission’s Advisory Council
Issuing positions on bioethical issues relevant to society
Establishing links with federal entities to promote the creation and operation of state bioethics commissions
Signing and implementing collaborative agreements with organizations and opportunities that favor the development and consolidation of bioethical culture
Carrying out activities assigned by the Secretary of Health
Providing information and technical cooperation required by the Ministry of Health’s administrative units and other dependencies/entities within the Federal Public Administration
Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

Research Ethics Committees

As delineated in HlthResRegs, REC-Op, REC-Op-Ref, REC-Op-Amd, G-RECs-Op-2018, G-RECReg, and MEX-57, all RECs are required to register with CONBIOÉTICA in order to conduct health research in humans.

G-RECs-Op-2018, and G-RECReg further state that CONBIOÉTICA has 10 working days from the business day following application receipt to accept the application, or require the applicant to correct omissions in the application within 15 working days from the business day following the date when the applicant is notified. If the applicant fails to respond within this timeframe, the application must be deemed not filed. Once the application has been admitted for processing, the Commission has 30 working days to notify the applicant of receipt, and if appropriate, to issue the corresponding registration certificate, which will be valid for three (3) years. The registration record must also be visibly displayed in the institution where REC operations occur and on its website, if applicable. Additionally, the registration number must be included in all official committee communications.

Per REC-Op-Amd, MEX-58, and G-RECReg, the REC registration form (MEX-29) is available for completion or download via MEX-58 or G-RECReg, and should be submitted in person according to the requirements outlined in REC-Op-Amd, MEX-58, and G-RECReg. The application must include the REC’s health institution identification data, an email address in order to receive Commission notifications, and the name and signature of the responsible person heading the REC. G-RECReg specifies that the applicant may request an appointment by phone or email to deliver all the documentation in printed form to CONBIOÉTICA, or send the application documentation via certified mail.

Refer to REC-Op-Amd, G-RECs-Op-2018, MEX-58, and G-RECReg for detailed registration application instructions and documentation requirements. See also MEX-57 for a list of registered RECs. See MEX-100 for REC registration renewal instructions.

As delineated in REC-Op-Amd, G-RECs-Op-2018, and G-RECRegRenew, a registration renewal application must be submitted by the principal or owner of the health establishment or by the legal representative to CONBIOÉTICA within 45 working days prior to the expiration of the validation period covered by the registration certificate. From this point, the timing requirements are the same as for the initial application. See REC-Op-Amd, G-RECs-Op-2018, and G-RECRegRenew for detailed registration renewal application requirements and the application form.

In addition to CONBIOÉTICA’s REC registration requirement, per GenHlthLaw, G-RECs-Op-2018, REC-Op, and REC-Op-Ref, RECs must be installed under the responsibility of the head of the health institution where the study is taking place. They are required to sign a REC Installation Certificate (MEX-27), which stipulates its characteristics and functions. Refer to G-RECs-Op-2018 for detailed certificate requirements. See also MEX-72 for information on CONBIOÉTICA’s REC follow-up monitoring reports.

According to NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the research institution owner must also register the REC with the Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud), and report on the modification, designation, or substitution of any of its members. Additionally, an annual report documenting the integration and activities of these committees must be submitted to the Ministry during the first 10 business days of June each year.

Hospital Bioethics Committees

G-CHBs-Op indicates that Hospital Bioethics Committees must also register with CONBIOÉTICA, who is, in turn, required to issue a registration record within a maximum of 15 business days. However, G-CHBReg states that CONBIOÉTICA is required to issue a registration within 25 days. CONBIOÉTICA’s registration is valid for three (3) years. Per G-CHBs-Op, the Hospital Bioethics Committee registration form must be submitted electronically through CONBIOÉTICA’s website. The application for registration renewal can be submitted one (1) month prior to the registration’s expiration date. Refer to G-CHBs-Op, MEX-56, MEX-59, and G-CHBReg for additional Hospital Bioethics Committee registration information.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Overview

In accordance with GenHlthLaw, Reg-COFEPRIS, HlthResRegs, and NOM-012-SSA3-2012, Mexico requires the applicant to submit a request to obtain research protocol authorization from the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)). Per HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, the applicant must also obtain a favorable decision from the Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)) and the Research Committee at the health institution where the study is being conducted, and when applicable, a favorable decision from the Biosafety Committee. Because COFEPRIS’s review and approval of a protocol authorization request is dependent upon obtaining a favorable decision from the REC and Research Committee, the COFEPRIS and ethics committee (REC and Research Committee) reviews may not be conducted in parallel.

Regulatory Submission

Pre-submission Registrations

As delineated in G-DIGIPRiS-Regis, prior to submitting a protocol authorization request to COFEPRIS, an applicant must first register in COFEPRIS’S digital procedures and services platform, DIGIPRiS: Online Regulation (MEX-86), using an e.signature (also known as e.firma) digital certificate. An e.signature can be obtained from the Tax Administration Service (Servicio de Administración Tributaria (SAT)) as described in MEX-83. See G-DIGIPRiS-Regis, G-DIGIPRiS-SystAccess, and MEX-89, for additional details on registering in MEX-86. See also MEX-106 for an instructional tutorial on registering in MEX-86, and see G-DIGIPRiS-FAQs for frequently asked questions on using MEX-86.

DIGIPRiS Submissions

As per Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts, G-HumResProt, and MEX-89, research protocol authorization and amendment/modification requests must be submitted electronically via DIGIPRiS (MEX-86). MEX-89 specifies that an exception to this requirement is if the user is required to present printed documents with a handwritten signature, or a physical inspection is required. Per G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts and MEX-89, the application request will be considered active when the documentation is signed and submitted, otherwise it will only remain in the system for 90 calendar days. According to G-DIGIPRiS-SystAccess, G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts, and MEX-89, once the procedure has begun, the user will be notified in MEX-86 of all request-related administrative acts (known as resolutions) (e.g., approvals, denials, and requests for additional information). Additionally, per G-DIGIPRiS-SystAccess, multiple requests and procedures can be in process simultaneously in MEX-86. Refer to G-DIGIPRiS-DocComp for instructions on validating and comparing research protocol documents issued through MEX-86. See also MEX-106 for additional DIGIPRiS user guides. (Note: COFEPRIS refers to applications as requests or procedures).

Agrmnt_ResProtProcs and MEX-87 further indicate that COFEPRIS will not request documentation in its physical or electronic files if the information was previously obtained in paper or electronic form. Per Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, once the research protocol has been authorized, applicants must submit the required documentation within 15 business days (See the Submission Content section for details.) Applications that do not include all required and accurate information outlined in Agrmnt_ResProtProcs may be revoked. If this occurs, applicants must resubmit their application to prevent delays in processing.

Per Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, for protocol authorization and protocol modification/amendment requests, the application must also include the original proof of payment along with two (2) copies of the receipt, as well as one (1) copy of a simple power of attorney for natural persons (i.e., a third-party signature, validation, certification, authorization, or approval), or, a public instrument which accredits legal representation must be presented for legal entities, if applicable. The G-HumResProt also indicates the same requirements for protocol authorization.

Per G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, all documents uploaded to DIGIPRiS (MEX-86) must be in “.pdf” format (unrestricted text file), unless another format is specified. In addition, G-HumResProt and G-ResProtocolAmd indicate that all documentation related to submitting applications for research protocol authorization and protocol modification/amendment must be in Spanish. MEX-84 also specifies that the protocol, investigator’s brochure (known as the researcher’s manual in Mexico), and the informed consent forms should be in Spanish.

(Note: COFEPRIS has not yet updated MEX-84, G-ResProtocolAmd, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts to align with the Agrmnt_ResProtProcs requirements. However, the ClinRegs team is regularly monitoring the COFEPRIS website for new developments and will post the most current sources when they become available.)

In addition, as specified in Agrmnt_FRAAuth, research protocol applications relying on prior authorizations from Foreign Regulatory Authorities (FRAs) under the regulatory “reliance” model must be submitted exclusively via DIGIPRiS (MEX-86). A certified, legalized, or apostilled copy (with Spanish translation) of the FRA’s authorization to conduct the clinical protocol must be attached under “Other documents.” The authorization must be issued within one (1) year to ensure document traceability. Copies of the protocol and the investigator’s brochure (IB) in English with Spanish translations must also be provided; only the Spanish versions require approval by the respective committees in Mexico. See the Scope of Assessment section for additional requirements governing the FRA reliance model.

As per MEX-71, for technical inquiries related to submitted procedures, applicants may contact the Comprehensive Service Center (Centro Integral de Servicios (CIS):

Call Center (CAT) Phone: 800 033 5050 (toll free within Mexico) or 55 53 40 09 96 (international calls) (per MEX-37)
Email: contactociudadano@cofepris.gob.mx

See also MEX-37, G-CIS, and G-CISMod for additional information on the CIS.

Enabled Pre-Assessment Support Unit (UHAP) Evaluation Submissions

Per MEX-21 and MEX-10, rather than submitting an application directly to COFEPRIS, an applicant may choose to have their application pre-assessed through an Enabled Pre-Assessment Support Unit (Unidad Habilitada de Apoyo al Predictamen (UHAP)) (MEX-69). A UHAP may be selected from the Coordinating Commission of National Institutes of Health and High Specialty Hospitals (Comisión Coordinadora de Institutos Nacionales de Salud y Hospitales de Alta Especialidad (CCINSHAE)) (referred to as the UHAP-CCINSHAE) or from the Mexican Social Security Institute (Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social (IMSS)). See Scope of Assessment section for detailed information on UHAPs.

Ethics Review Submission

As earlier stated, per HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, all requests for research protocol authorization in human beings and/or their biological samples in Mexico require the applicant to obtain a favorable decision from the REC and the Research Committee, and when applicable, a favorable decision from the Biosafety Committee. Because the submission process at individual institutional RECs will vary, applicants should review and follow their institution’s specific requirements.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

As delineated in Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, and G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts, the following documentation must be submitted to the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) as part of the approval process (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Online application form (Authorization, Certificates and Visits form) (MEX-25) (see MEX-18 for instructions on completing MEX-25)
Simple power of attorney, for natural persons (i.e., a third-party signature, validation, certification, authorization, or approval), or a public instrument which accredits legal representation for legal entities, if applicable
Payment receipt and request letter
Duly completed single form by institutional/establishment head where research will be conducted (one (1) copy) (See form in Single Annex in Agrmnt_ResProtProcs)
Duly completed single form by principal investigator (PI)/research team (including certificates of studies accrediting technical competence, good clinical practice (GCP), and specialized experience by PI/research team (one (1) copy)) (See form in Single Annex in Agrmnt_ResProtProcs)
Duly completed single form by sponsor (See form in Single Annex in Agrmnt_ResProtProcs)
Single Committee form which consolidates approvals from applicable committees, duly required (one (1) copy) (See form in Single Annex in Agrmnt_ResProtProcs)
Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)) Registry (one (1) copy)
Research protocol (one (1) copy)
Study schedule (one (1) copy)
Investigator’s Brochure (IB) (also known as Researcher’s Manual in Mexico) or equivalent document (one (1) copy)
Informed consent form
Research site(s)
Emergency care center (See form in Single Annex in Agrmnt_ResProtProcs)
Certificate of compliance with Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) for investigational products (IPs) or equivalent document, stability report, and IP/placebo results, except for risk-free research (observational studies) (one (1) copy)
(Note: COFEPRIS has not yet updated MEX-84, G-ResProtocolAmd, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts to align with the Agrmnt_ResProtProcs requirements. However, the ClinRegs team is regularly monitoring the COFEPRIS website for new developments and will post the most current sources when they become available.)

In addition, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs states that once the research protocol has been authorized, applicants must submit within 15 business days, the following:

Consent and/or informed assent, previously approved by the Research Ethics Committee
Study insurance (Policy/Certificate) or current financial fund that certifies coverage for research participants, and
Standard form for medical emergencies and the agreement or contract for the care of medical emergencies, if applicable
Risk-free research (observational studies) only requires the REC-approved consent and/or informed assent form to be submitted per Agrmnt_ResProtProcs.

Refer to Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, and G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts for more detailed submission information. See also MEX-36 for information on obtaining a certificate of GMP.

As outlined in Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, for any protocol authorization amendment or modification (COFEPRIS-09-012), applicants must submit a Single Amendment or Modification Request Form (See form in Single Annex in Agrmnt_ResProtProcs) and proof of payment. If applicable, a simple power of attorney for natural persons (i.e., a third-party signature, validation, certification, authorization, or approval), or a public instrument which accredits legal representation for legal entities, if applicable, must also be provided. In addition, per Agrmnt_ResProtProcs and G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts, specific documentation are required depending on which of the following amendment/modification categories is being updated:

Protocol, informed consent/assent, or IB
Center inclusion
Research center change
PI change
Research team changes
Emergency care center changes
Evaluation committee changes
Security amendment
Establishment owner change
Sponsor change
Change/addition of importer
Other modifications
See also Scope of Assessment and Timeline of Review sections for additional COFEPRIS review process and timeline information.

Ethics Committee Requirements

As indicated in MEX-84 and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, the following documentation should be submitted to obtain the favorable opinion of the REC, the Research Committee, and where appropriate, the Biosafety Committee:

Full title and number of the research protocol
Research protocol with the version and date in Spanish
IB with the version and date in Spanish
Full name of the IP corresponding to the research center
Research center company name and address
Informed consent forms with the version and date in Spanish
Protocol summary
Detailed description of the documents evaluated and approved in Spanish, citing version and date
Validity of the approval opinion (not greater than one (1) year)
Name, position, and signature of the person responsible who supports the opinion
Confirmation of the evaluation of aspects of a scientific nature, the risk/benefit of the protocol as well as the guarantee and well-being of the participants
Additionally, a signed opinion issued on letterhead should be submitted that includes:

Committee name and address (in accordance with its current registration)
Date the opinion was issued
PI name
Company name and address of the research center
Title of the study and protocol number
Status/result of the evaluation of the documents (must be approved)
Date of issue of the opinion (day, month, and year)
Name and position of the signatory who supports the opinion (must be the President or the Secretary Member)
G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, also notes that only the opinions with the signature of the President of the REC (or, where appropriate, the Secretary-Vocal) will be accepted with a letter attached stating “NO VOTE” or a justification for the absence of the president. See MEX-84 and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts for additional ethics committee requirements.

However, per Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, COFEPRIS has published a Single Committee form, which merges the REC, Research Committee, and where applicable, Biosafety Committee documentation requirements into a single form. The form includes a section for the appropriate committee to provide information concerning its review and approval of the research protocol based on the following elements:

PI and research center names
Committee session data (including folio, protocol number, session data, approval date, session type (ordinary/extraordinary), and minutes number)
Research protocol data (including protocol number, study phase, title, short title, study risk level, research sponsor)
List of approved documents (including document names, versions, and dates)
List of committee members (including names, professions/disciplines, and positions)
Committee registration data (including establishment name or business name, address, registration number, start of validity or issue date, validity, expiration date)
Declaration of no conflict of interest and confidentiality
Research monitoring (periodic and continuous monitoring)
Express declaration of no vote for each member who is part of the research team
See Agrmnt_ResProtProcs for detailed requirements.

G-HumResProt also indicates that the Single Committee form should provide information related to the tests performed on the IP for a specific period of time under the influence of temperature, humidity, or light in the container that contains it, to ensure its shelf life from the date of manufacture to the date of the last administration.

Clinical Protocol

As set forth in MEX-84 and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, which are in compliance with the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MEX-22) and NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the research protocol should include the following elements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Title, acronym, and protocol number (corresponds to the opinion of the committee(s) evaluators)
Document version and date, and amendments (if applicable) (corresponds to the opinion of the committee(s) evaluators)
Sponsor name/address and monitor, if different from sponsor
Theoretical framework (IP name/description, preclinical findings summary, etc.)
Definition of problem
Participant selection and withdrawal criteria
Statement that the clinical trial will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, good clinical practices, and local regulatory requirements
Background
Rationale
Hypotheses (if applicable, includes statistical hypotheses)
General objective (if applicable, includes specific, primary, secondary, or exploratory objectives)
Materials and methods
Study design (e.g., inclusion/exclusion and elimination criteria; information input, processing, analysis, and interpretation)
Phase and type of study
Study duration
Sample size (global and local, as appropriate)
Countries where the research will be carried out
Health conditions or problems studied
Capture, processing, analysis, and interpretation of the information obtained
Route of administration, dose, dosing regimen, and treatment period(s) and justification
Accountability procedure for handling the IP and placebo (if applicable)
Mechanisms for maintaining randomization and blinding (if applicable), and codes for breaking them (e.g., criteria for premature unblinding, etc.)
Statistical considerations
Ethical considerations
Efficacy and safety assessments
Study schedule (document detailing activities to be carried out during the investigation)
Bibliographic references and relevant trial data
Names and signatures of PI and associate researchers (no more than five (5), classified according to their involvement in the research project)
Other documents related to the research project or protocol
Optional pre-assessment evaluation opinion (See Scope of Assessment and Submission Process sections for details on pre-assessment evaluations)
In addition to the protocol submission, per NOM-012-SSA3-2012, an additional letter should accompany the application. Please refer to NOM-012-SSA3-2012 for more specific letter instructions. See also MEX-84 and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts for more detailed protocol requirements. (Note: Per MEX-2, COFEPRIS is in the process of implementing MEX-22).

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Overview

As delineated in HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, G-HumResProt, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS))’s review and approval of a protocol authorization request is dependent upon obtaining a favorable decision from the health institution’s Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)) and the Research Committee, and where applicable, the Biosafety Committee. Therefore, COFEPRIS and ethics committee (REC, Research Committee, and Biosafety Committee) reviews may not be conducted in parallel. However, per HlthResRegs, the REC, the Research Committee, and the Biosafety Committee may meet together to decide whether to authorize a protocol to conduct research on humans, as appropriate.

Regulatory Authority Approval

Pursuant to HlthResRegs, COFEPRIS must approve a request for research protocol authorization within 30 business days from the day following an application’s filing. However, according to Agrmnt_ResProtProcs and G-HumResProt, COFEPRIS is required to complete its review of research protocol authorization requests within 30 calendar days. Agrmnt_ResProtProcs further specifies that this timeline applies to the review of human research protocols that have already been authorized by a foreign regulatory authority, as well as to research protocol modifications or amendments.

In addition, per G-HumResProt, during the prevention period, COFEPRIS has 10 calendar days to notify an applicant of any deficiencies or request additional information, and an applicant must respond within five (5) business days. If COFEPRIS does not respond within the 30-day timeline, the application will be deemed denied.

See the Scope of Assessment section for additional information on COFEPRIS’s evaluation process, and see Submission Process section for details on tracking submitted procedures via COFEPRIS’s digital procedures and services platform, DIGIPRiS: Online Regulation (MEX-86).

Also, as specified in Agrmnt_FRAAuth, COFEPRIS must issue a decision within 45 calendar days for research protocol applications involving human beings submitted under the regulatory “reliance” model, which are based on prior authorization from a Foreign Regulatory Authority (FRA). See the Scope of Assessment and Submission Process sections for additional requirements governing the FRA reliance model and submission procedures.

Per Reg-HlthProd and G-UnregDrugImprts, COFEPRIS has 10 days to approve import requests for investigational drug products. If COFEPRIS does not respond within this timeframe, the request is deemed approved. G-UnregDrugImprts also notes that COFEPRIS has eight (8) business days to send the applicant a prevention notification regarding missing or additional information required. The applicant, in turn, has five (5) business days to respond.

Enabled Pre-Assessment Support Unit (UHAP) Evaluations

Per HlthResRegs, prior to submitting an authorization request, applicants may also obtain a pre-assessment evaluation by an authorized third party that helps to facilitate COFEPRIS’s review. Per MEX-21 and MEX-10, third parties are also known as Enabled Pre-Assessment Support Units (Unidad Habilitada de Apoyo al Predictamens (UHAPs)) (MEX-69) within the Coordinating Commission of National Institutes of Health and High Specialty Hospitals (Comisión Coordinadora de Institutos Nacionales de Salud y Hospitales de Alta Especialidad (CCINSHAE)) (referred to as the UHAP-CCINSHAE) or UHAPs within the Mexican Social Security Institute (Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social (IMSS)). According to MEX-10, the UHAP has a maximum of 30 calendar days to respond to an evaluation request. See MEX-10 and MEX-98 for additional information on authorized third parties. See the Scope of Assessment and Submission Process sections for detailed UHAP information.

Ethics Committee Approval

As delineated in G-RECs-Op-2018, the REC agenda and documents corresponding to each session should be delivered at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting. It is then recommended that the REC’s decision be sent within a period not exceeding five (5) working days after the committee has met, or if applicable, not to exceed 30 calendar days from the date of request for its review. G-RECs-Op-2018 and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts also state that the approval of a new application is valid for one (1) year.

In addition, G-RECs-Op-2018 indicates that the REC should establish procedures for monitoring approved studies, from the point at which the decision was made until the completion of the investigation and reporting of results. RECs should conduct at least one (1) review a year.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Overview

In accordance with GenHlthLaw, Reg-COFEPRIS, HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, COFEPRIS-GCP, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts, and MEX-84, a clinical trial can only commence after an applicant receives authorization from Mexico’s Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)). Per HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, the applicant must also obtain a favorable decision from the Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)) and the Research Committee at the health institution where the study is being conducted, and when applicable, a favorable decision from the Biosafety Committee. No waiting period is required following the applicant’s receipt of these approvals.

As per GenHlthLaw, an applicant must be a resident of Mexico and is required to obtain an import license from COFEPRIS for the shipment of an investigational product to be used in the trial. The applicant must be a resident of Mexico or have a legal representative submit the application on their behalf. (See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information).

As set forth in NOM-220-SSA1-2016, the health record holder, principal investigator (PI), sponsor, or person responsible for a study authorized by COFEPRIS must also issue a notice of a study’s commencement (e.g., first visit of the first patient) and a notice of its completion (e.g., last visit of the last patient).

Clinical Trial Agreement

While NOM-012-SSA3-2012, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts state that prior to initiating the trial, if applicable, the sponsor must sign a letter of acceptance that serves as an agreement to assume the project obligations and rights stated in the letter, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, has eliminated this requirement as of June 2025.

Additionally, as of June 2025, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs has eliminated the requirement stated in MEX-84, G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, and NOM-012-SSA3-2012 that the sponsor must sign a letter to ensure there are no conflicts of interest that could lead to the interruption of treatment for the research participant.

According to COFEPRIS-GCP, COFEPRIS requires the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) to comply with the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32) for conducting clinical trials. COFEPRIS-GCP indicates that the sponsor must establish in writing each of the research team member functions and responsibilities, and the financial agreement with the PI. The sponsor or the CRO must also establish a declaration of financing, sponsorship, affiliations, contracts of agreements with other institutions involved, and procedures for handling any conflict(s) of interest, and a system for providing incentives and quantity/payments to research participants. MEX-32 specifies that the financial aspects of the trial should be documented in an agreement between the sponsor and the investigator and the institution.

Further, per MEX-32, prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s) and the institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and an investigator’s brochure and should provide sufficient time for the investigator and institution to review the protocol and the information provided.

COFEPRIS-GCP further states that in the case of delegating investigation-related activities to a CRO, the sponsor must also establish in writing each of the activities that are delegated. However, the ultimate responsibility for all CRO activities remains with the sponsor. Additionally, COFEPRIS-GCP indicates that the sponsor or the CRO must establish a declaration of financing, sponsorship, affiliations, contracts, or agreements with other institutions involved, handling of any conflicts of interest, incentives, and quantity and payments to the research participants.

According to MEX-32, the sponsor or the CRO must also obtain the investigator(s)’s and the institution(s)’s agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with MEX-32 and the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and approved by the ethics committee
Comply with data recording and reporting procedures
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain essential documents until the sponsor informs them that they are no longer needed
Per MEX-32, the sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement.

Clinical Trial Registration

Per G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts and G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts, once COFEPRIS approves an authorization request, some of the data provided by the applicant in COFEPRIS’s digital procedures and services platform, DIGIPRiS: Online Regulation (MEX-86), is automatically migrated to COFEPRIS’s National Registry of Clinical Trials (Registro Nacional de Ensayos Clínicos (RNEC)) database (MEX-68). Per MEX-88, RNEC was integrated into MEX-86 as RNEC v2.0.

Governance

Per GenHlthLaw, HlthResRegs, and NOM-012-SSA3-2012, every health institution where research is conducted is required to establish a Research Committee and a Biosafety Committee. Per HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, G-HumResProt, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, REC and Research Committee approval is also required for each trial site where a study is being conducted, and when applicable, Biosafety Committee approval is required as well.

HlthResRegs explains that the Research Committee evaluates the technical quality and scientific merit of the proposed research, and its opinion must contain the REC opinion and, where applicable, the Biosafety Committee opinion. The Biosafety Committee, in turn, is responsible for determining and regulating the use of ionizing radiation or genetic engineering techniques within the health institution as indicated in HlthResRegs, GenHlthLaw, and NOM-012-SSA3-2012. Pursuant to HlthResRegs and NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the Biosafety Committee issues a technical opinion on the biosafety aspects of the proposed research and ensures that research study staff, research participants, the community, and the environment are protected against radiological risks.

Additionally, per MEX-47, COFEPRIS is responsible for registering Research Committees and Biosafety Committees. Refer to MEX-47, G-BiosafetyReg, G-ResCommReg, and MEX-102 for detailed Research Committee and Biosafety Committee registration requirements. See MEX-26 for COFEPRIS’s Research Committee and Biosafety Committee registration form.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

In accordance with NOM-220-SSA1-2016, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, G-ClinResPV, and G-PharmPerSafRpt, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Mexico’s safety reporting requirements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Adverse Event/Experience (AE) – Any undesirable medical event that may occur in a research participant during the clinical investigation stage of a drug/vaccine, but does not necessarily have a causal relationship to it
Adverse Drug Reaction or Adverse Reaction (ADR) – An unwanted response to a drug, in which the causal relationship with it is, at least, reasonably attributable
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction – One whose nature or severity is inconsistent with the applicable product information, or in the documentation presented for its health registration
Suspected Adverse Drug Reaction (SRAM) – Any clinical or laboratory manifestation that occurs after administration of one (1) or more drugs
Safety Reporting Requirements

As specified in NOM-220-SSA1-2016-Mod, for clinical study related incidents involving health professionals (public and private) or institutions conducting health research, notifications to the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS))’s National Pharmacovigilance Center (CNFV) must be submitted according to the following timelines:

Serious SRAMs or serious AEs/ADRs must be reported within a maximum of seven (7) calendar days, if fatal, and within a maximum of 15 days, if not fatal (severe cases from abroad should only be included in the final study safety report, if the study has a research center in Mexico)
Not serious SRAMs or AEs/ADRs must be reported at the end of the study
Two (2) or more serious cases, in the same place with the same drug and the same batch, must be reported immediately, and no later than 48 hours
When a review of scientific literature shows a safety issue, it should be reported within a maximum of 30 calendar days from first knowledge of the AE/ADR
HlthResRegs and NOM-012-SSA3-2012 state that the institution must notify and provide a report to the Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud) within a period of 15 days after the suspension or cancellation of the research has been agreed upon. The report should specify the effect(s) detected, all medical care steps adopted, and the consequences produced. A detailed report on the research participant(s) physical condition should also be included. NOM-012-SSA3-2012 indicates that all serious or deadly adverse reactions or effects must be immediately reported to the Ministry. Per NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the principal investigator (PI), the Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)), the institutional head(s), or the Ministry of Health must also suspend or cancel the research as soon as any AE representing an ethical impediment to research is identified.

Additionally, per NOM-220-SSA1-2016, institutions must notify the CNFV of a study’s suspension or cancellation within a maximum of 15 days. If the study is resumed, the CNFV must also be notified within a maximum of 15 working days following the study’s recommencement.

Per MEX-2, COFEPRIS has also implemented the following International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) guidelines:

Guideline E2B(R3) on Electronic Transmission of Individual Case Safety Reports (ICSRs) – Data Elements and Message Specification – Implementation Guide (MEX-79)
E2B(R3) Individual Case Safety Report (ICSR) Specification and Related Files (MEX-101)
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (MEX-80)
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Pharmacovigilance Planning (E2E) (MEX-82)
Investigator Responsibilities

As specified in HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, and COFEPRIS-GCP, the PI must report to the REC all probable AEs or any AEs directly related to the research study. Per NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the investigator is also responsible for submitting safety reports to the CNFV.

Other Safety Reports

As indicated in NOM-220-SSA1-2016, a pharmacovigilance study protocol should be prepared and submitted to the Executive Director of Pharmacopeia and Pharmacovigilance through COFEPRIS’s Comprehensive Service Center (Centro Integral de Servicios (CIS)) (MEX-37).

Per NOM-220-SSA1-2016, a clinical safety report is also required to be submitted to the CNFV for all trials, sponsored or not, that have at least one (1) site or research center in Mexico. In addition, G-ClinResPV explains that a final safety report must be submitted to the CNFV in the following circumstances:

A study is completed that has included at least one (1) research center in Mexico
A study has been cancelled, discontinued, or permanently suspended
A bioequivalence, bioavailability, and pharmacokinetics study is concluded
Refer to G-ClinResPV and G-PharmPerSafRpt for additional report writing instructions and criteria that align with the safety reporting requirements delineated in NOM-220-SSA1-2016 and NOM-220-SSA1-2016-Mod. See also G-PharmRptReq for detailed pharmacovigilance reporting guidelines and to extend health registrations for drug products.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

G-ClinResPV specifies that clinical safety reports must be written in Spanish and submitted electronically (in PDF format) to the CNFV. In addition, reports should be submitted by either the health record holder or the sponsor or the legal representative to avoid sending duplicate information to the CNFV. G-PharmPerSafRpt states, in turn, that the safety report must be written in Spanish in the sections delineated in Annex 1 of G-PharmPerSafRpt and submitted electronically via CD or USB in editable PDF format. As indicated in G-ClinResPV and G-PharmPerSafRpt, the annual safety report submission date is determined by the date of the study’s first national authorization by COFEPRIS.

As per MEX-117, the E-Reporting Industry platform, which is linked to VigiFlow (MEX-43), was developed by the World Health Organization (WHO)’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the pharmaceutical industry to manage individual case safety reports at the national level. Reports are submitted by pharmaceutical industry professionals including health registration holders or their legal representatives and institutions/establishments where research is conducted as well as contract research organizations, distributors, and marketers. MEX-117 also specifies the CNFV is responsible for granting access to the E-Reporting Industry tool, and requests can be made via email: xmlvigiflow@cofepris.gob.mx. Refer to MEX-117 for details. Additionally, per MEX-77, state centers, institutional coordinating centers, institutional centers, and pharmacovigilance units of the National Health System should also report AE/ADRs, SRAMs, adverse events following immunization (ESAVIs), and other safety issues via MEX-43.

MEX-78, in turn, provides patients, consumers, and health professionals instructions on reporting ADRs via VIGIRAM (MEX-118). See MEX-12 for instructions on using MEX-118 and see MEX-30 for the form to be completed via MEX-118. See also G-ADR-PatientRpt for information on how patients, consumers, and/or family members report suspected ADRs.

Refer to NOM-220-SSA1-2016 for detailed reporting requirements, and the G-AENotif, MEX-44, and MEX-117 for submitting safety reports via VigiFlow (MEX-43). See also MEX-54 for additional CNFV issued pharmacovigilance guidelines and requirements.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

Per HlthResRegs and NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the principal investigator (PI) must prepare and submit a progress report (also referred to as a partial technical or technical-descriptive report) (MEX-31) to the Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud) at any time, but at least once a year, to communicate progress and partial research study results. In addition, per NOM-012-SSA3-2012, information related to any investigation that the PI submits to the Ministry of Health must be classified as confidential. The PI must also provide a copy of every report to the head of the Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)) and the Research Committee, and if applicable, the Biosafety Committee of the institution where the research takes place.

NOM-012-SSA3-2012 and MEX-31 specify that the progress reports should describe the results obtained and at a minimum should include the following elements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Study data
Participating research centers
Amendments and modifications authorized during study development
Partial technical-descriptive reports (include official responses to the partial/annual technical-descriptive reports carried out) (see Annex I of MEX-31)
Materials and methods
Summary of adverse event (AE) reports identified during study development (include a simple copy of the response letters (or a simple copy of the CIS entry form for the AE reports) issued by Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS))’s National Pharmacovigilance Center (CNFV), which corresponds with the reports submitted) (Annex I)
Results
Conclusions
Bibliographic references (include only those references that served as the basis for the planning and execution of the research)
Any relevant exhibits
MEX-31 also indicates the following annexes must be submitted:

Annex I – A simple copy of the COFEPRIS’s Comprehensive Service Center (Centro Integral de Servicios (CIS)) entry form for the Free Letter of Notification of AE(s) (submitted to the CNFV); and a simple copy of the official authorization letter of the respective Security Amendment (Homoclave COFEPRIS-09-012), when applicable
Annex II – A simple copy of the Technical Sheet of the National Registry of Clinical Trials (Registro Nacional de Ensayos Clínicos (RNEC)), duly completed and in its entirety (except for the section referring to results, which must be presented in the Final Technical Report submission)
Annex III – A simple copy of the PI’s signed Delegation of Responsibilities Letter, which was submitted with the initial authorization process for the research protocol and/or inclusion of the research center (including a simple copy of the amendment/modification letter, if applicable)
Annex IV – Patient materials (documents that do not require COFEPRIS authorization, but which are acknowledged and are the same as those approved by the evaluation committees) generated from the authorization of the protocol’s implementation until the clinical study’s conclusion
Annex V – A simple copy of the signed letters from the REC (CEI), the Research Committee, and the Biosafety Committee (as applicable) of each center where the study is carried out; the letters should notify or acknowledge receipt of each research center’s annual activities report
Other Annexes – The researcher may include any annexes deemed necessary to support the partial technical-descriptive report, or those documents required by the institution or establishment where the research is carried out. This section must also indicate which and how many annexes are attached to the form.
Additionally, in accordance with NOM-012-SSA3-2012, a report should be submitted annually to the Ministry of Health on the integration and activities of the REC, the Research Committee, and, if applicable, the Biosafety Committee, during the first 10 business days of June.

Final Report

As set forth in HlthResRegs and NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the PI is required to submit a final report to the Ministry of Health in order to communicate the final results of a research protocol or project as well as the major findings obtained throughout the course of the study. Per NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the PI must also deliver a copy of this report to the research team members, the REC (CEI), the Research Committee, and the Biosafety Committee, as applicable, where the study was conducted.

However, per MEX-94 and MEX-28, the sponsor/the sponsor’s contract research organization (CRO) and the PI share responsibility for submitting the final report to the CIS (MEX-37). Once the final report is submitted, MEX-94 specifies that the CIS assigns an entry number to the submitted application along with the procedural code, “ES45”. The CIS’s acknowledgement of the receipt of information submitted should not be interpreted as an official authorization.

As per NOM-012-SSA3-2012 and MEX-94, the final reports should include the same basic requirements as those indicated in the Interim and Annual Progress Reports, with the following differences: they must also contain a clinical study synopsis with the main research results (including the corresponding analysis and interpretation), conclusions, and bibliographic references (including only those sources that served as a basis for planning and executing the research, as well as for analyzing the results).

Additionally, per MEX-94, the following annexes must also be submitted:

Annex I – A simple copy of the CIS Entry Slip of the Final Safety Report Entry Form submitted to the CNFV
Annex II – A simple copy of the RNEC Technical Data Sheet, duly completed and in its entirety
Annex III – A simple copy of the PI’s signed Letter of Delegation of Responsibilities, which was submitted with the initial authorization process for the research protocol and/or inclusion of the research center (including a copy of the amendment/modification letter, if applicable)
Annex IV – Patient materials (documents that do not require COFEPRIS authorization, but which are acknowledged and are the same as those approved by the evaluation committees) generated from the authorization of the protocol’s implementation until the clinical study’s conclusion
Annex V – A simple copy of the signed letters from the REC (CEI), the Research Committee, and the Biosafety Committee (as applicable) of each center where the study was carried out, specifying that they are aware of the study’s completion
Annex VI – Letters signed by each PI, notifying them of the study’s completion, the closure of the center's activities, and the conclusion and follow-up of the research participants enrolled at their respective research center
Other Annexes – The researcher may include any annexes deemed necessary to support the technical-descriptive report or those required by the institution or establishment where the research is carried out. This section must also indicate which and how many annexes are attached to the form.
See section 7.4 of NOM-012-SSA3-2012 and MEX-94 for additional required report information.

HlthResRegs further states that the PI is also required to submit a final report to the Research Committee at the institution where the study was conducted. Refer to MEX-94 for the reporting form.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
As set forth in NOM-012-SSA3-2012, COFEPRIS-GCP, and MEX-84, a sponsor is defined as an individual or corporation willing to undertake responsibilities to participate and finance a research project or protocol, in full or in part.

According to COFEPRIS-GCP, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) requires the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) to comply with the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32) for conducting clinical trials. Per COFEPRIS-GCP and MEX-32, a sponsor is an individual, company, institution, or organization which takes responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a clinical trial. A sponsor may also hire a CRO to conduct one (1) or more of the activities related to health research that are sponsored in the country. The sponsor must specify in writing any trial-related duty and function that is transferred to and assumed by a CRO. However, the ultimate responsibility for all CRO activities remains with the sponsor. Additionally, MEX-32 notes the ultimate responsibility for the quality and integrity of the trial data always resides with the sponsor, and any trial-related duties and functions not specifically transferred to and assumed by a CRO are retained by the sponsor. COFEPRIS-GCP also indicates that CROs of foreign origin must also have a registered address in Mexico, and an authorization to carry out clinical research activities in the country.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Overview

According to COFEPRIS-GCP, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) requires the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) to comply with the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6 (R1) (MEX-32) for conducting clinical trials. COFEPRIS-GCP states the sponsor or the CRO is responsible for selecting each research center and ensuring that COFEPRIS has authorized its operation as well as the human and material resources needed to conduct research. MEX-32 indicates the sponsor should ensure the investigator(s) have adequate resources to properly conduct the trial for which they are selected. Additionally, MEX-32, explains the investigator should have available an adequate number of qualified staff and adequate facilities for the foreseen duration of the trial to conduct the trial properly and safely.

Per COFEPRIS-GCP, the sponsor must establish in writing each of the research team member functions and responsibilities, and the financial agreement with the principal investigator (PI). G-HumResProt, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts also note the sponsor or the CRO must specify in a letter the human and material resources that will be allocated for the research and the way in which they will be provided and distributed to the research sites.

As stated in the HlthResRegs and NOM-012-SSA3-2012, all investigators must possess appropriate qualifications, training, and experience. Per COFEPRIS-GCP, the PI is also responsible for selecting a research team with knowledge, education, and training in MEX-32, and in the process of the investigation in which the investigator is involved. Per MEX-32, the sponsor must ensure each investigator is qualified by education, training, and experience to assume responsibility for the proper conduct of the trial; meets all the qualifications specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s); and provides evidence of such qualifications through updated curriculum vitae (CV) and/or other relevant documentation requested by the sponsor, the ethics committee (EC), and/or COFEPRIS. Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, and MEX-84 also specify the PI should provide legally issued and registered documentation (e.g., certificates of studies and professional licenses) delineating appropriate academic training and experience appropriate to the research to be conducted, which includes academic preparation, representative scientific production, and good clinical practice (GCP).

Additionally, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts indicate that institutions in charge of providing medical care for study related medical emergencies are required to sign an agreement or contract to provide these services, and provide a letter stating the institution’s acceptance, authorization, and description of the available resources. The agreement must comply with NOM-027-SSA3-2013, which establishes the criteria for the operation and care in providing emergency services in health care institutions.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

COFEPRIS-GCP indicates that foreign CROs must have a registered address in Mexico, and an authorization or notice specifying the activities to be carried out in the country.

Data Safety Monitoring Board

According to COFEPRIS-GCP, the sponsor or the CRO is responsible for the continuous monitoring of the study which should be established based on the nature of the study, and must ensure study monitoring is carried out in compliance with MEX-32. Per MEX-32, the sponsor or the CRO may consider establishing an independent data monitoring committee to assess the progress of a clinical trial, the safety data, the critical efficacy endpoints, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial. The committee should have written operating procedures and maintain written records of its meetings.

Multicenter Studies

As delineated in MEX-32, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor or the CRO must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor, and if required, by COFEPRIS, and given ethics committee approval
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication between investigators is facilitated
Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Insurance

As set forth in COFEPRIS-GCP, the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) must establish a financial fund or have insurance to cover serious adverse events that result from the medication or the research study.

Additionally, COFEPRIS-GCP requires the sponsor or the CRO to comply with the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32), which states that the sponsor should provide insurance or should indemnify (legal and financial coverage) the investigator/institution against claims arising from the trial, except for those claims arising from malpractice and/or negligence. Per MEX-32, if required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), the sponsor should provide insurance or should indemnify (legal and financial coverage) the investigator and the institution against claims arising from the trial, except for claims that arise from malpractice and/or negligence.

Compensation

As specified in COFEPRIS-GCP, the sponsor or the designated CRO must establish a statement of funding and describe the quantity and payments to be allocated for research participants.

Per MEX-32, the ethics committee (EC) should review both the amount and method of payment to participants to ensure that neither presents problems of coercion or undue influence on the trial participants. Payments to a participant should be prorated and not wholly contingent on the completion of the trial by the participant.

Injury or Death

Per Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, once the research protocol has been authorized, applicants must provide the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) with a policy or certificate of study insurance or a copy of the current financial fund that certifies coverage for research participants. G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts also indicates the sponsor should provide COFEPRIS with a copy of the financial fund or current insurance policy, which guarantees the continuity of the medical treatment and the compensation to which the participant will be legally entitled in the event of suffering damages directly related to the development of the research. MEX-84 specifies that the insurance policy or current document from the financial fund should cover all study participants at the local level. The document guarantees coverage to the participant in case of any injury or damage related to the research. The insurance policy and certificate, which must be on behalf of the license holder and the sponsor, must indicate the number of participants that will be covered, the study title, and the protocol number.

(Note: COFEPRIS has not yet updated MEX-84, G-ResProtocolAmd, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts to align with the Agrmnt_ResProtProcs requirements. However, the ClinRegs team is regularly monitoring the COFEPRIS website for new developments and will post the most current sources when they become available.)

Although NOM-012-SSA3-2012 does not specifically ascribe responsibility to the sponsor, it indicates that the research budget must include the availability of a financial fund as well as mechanisms to guarantee continuity of medical treatment and indemnity of the research participant, in the event of trial-related injuries. Additionally, the head of the institution or establishment, the Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)), Research Committee, or Biosafety Committee, the PI, and, where applicable, the sponsor, will be responsible in accordance with their area of competence, for the damage to health resulting from the development of the research as well as damage resulting from the interruption or early suspension of treatment for reasons not attributable to the research participant. HlthResRegs and GenHlthLaw also specify that the health care institution and the sponsor or the CRO must provide medical attention to injured participants, and where appropriate, legally required compensation, if the injuries are directly related to the study. Medical attention that is provided to such participants will not prejudice the compensation that may be legally due from the study.

MEX-32 explains the sponsor's policies and procedures should address the costs of treatment of trial participants in the event of trial-related injuries in accordance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s). In addition, when study participants receive compensation, the method and manner of compensation should comply with applicable regulatory requirement(s).

Trial Participation

Per COFEPRIS-GCP, the sponsor or the CRO must ensure that each and every treatment, clinical analysis procedure, and other study procedures are delivered in a timely manner, in good condition, and free of charge to the research participant.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

According to COFEPRIS-GCP, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) requires the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) to comply with the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32), and to ensure and control the quality of the research during a study. Per COFEPRIS-GCP and MEX-32, the sponsor or the CRO is also responsible for establishing written standard operating procedures (SOPs) for each stage of the investigation. In addition, the sponsor or the CRO must implement and maintain quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems to make certain the trial is conducted, and data are generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol.

MEX-32 further delineates the sponsor or the CRO is required to obtain agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. The sponsor and investigator(s) agreement should be confirmed in writing prior to the trial. QC should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been correctly processed.

Monitoring Requirements

According to COFEPRIS-GCP, the sponsor or the CRO must ensure and control the quality of the research through periodic monitoring visits and audits to verify compliance with the protocol and the SOPs, and if necessary, compliance with reports derived from inspections or verifications by COFEPRIS. The principal investigator (PI) is responsible for reporting and guaranteeing the quality and validity of the data obtained during the investigation. MEX-32 indicates the sponsor should ensure that the trials are adequately monitored and determine the appropriate extent and nature of monitoring, which should be based on considerations such as the objective, purpose, design, complexity, blinding, size, and endpoints of the trial.

Additionally, per MEX-32, the sponsor should also appoint monitors who should be appropriately trained, and have the scientific and/or clinical knowledge needed to monitor the trial adequately. A monitor’s qualifications should be documented. Monitors should also be thoroughly familiar with the investigational product(s), the protocol, written informed consent form, any other written information to be provided to research participants, the sponsor’s SOPs, COFEPRIS-GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).

MEX-32 further indicates the sponsor should appoint individuals, who are independent of the clinical trials/systems, to conduct audits and ensure the auditors are qualified by training and experience to conduct audits properly. An auditor’s qualifications should be documented. The sponsor should also ensure the auditing of clinical trials/systems is conducted in accordance with the sponsor's written procedures on what to audit, how to audit, the frequency of audits, and the form and content of audit reports. The sponsor's audit plan and procedures for a trial audit should be guided by the importance of the trial submissions to regulatory authorities, the number of study participants, the type and complexity of the trial, the level of risks to the study participants, and any identified problem(s). Auditor(s) observations and findings of the auditor should be documented.

Pursuant to MEX-32, noncompliance with the protocol, SOPs, good clinical practice (GCP), and/or applicable regulatory requirement(s) by an investigator/institution, or by member(s) of the sponsor's staff should lead to prompt action by the sponsor to secure compliance. If the monitoring and/or auditing identifies serious and/or persistent noncompliance on the part of an investigator/institution, the sponsor should terminate the investigator's/institution’s participation in the trial and notify promptly the regulatory authority(ies). Also, upon the request of the monitor, auditor, ethics committee (EC), or COFEPRIS, the investigator/institution should also make available for direct access all requested trial-related records. See MEX-32 for detailed monitoring and auditing requirements.

Per NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the institutional head, the Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)), the Research Committee, or the Biosafety Committee (where applicable), the PI, and the sponsor, must be responsible, in accordance with their area of competence, for monitoring the research. Agrmnt_ResProtProcs specifies that the sponsor is required to submit a monitoring and audit plan to ensure that clinical trial oversight mechanisms are in place to verify that all trial-related activities are subject to quality and other controls to reduce errors, increase objectivity, and ensure consistent processes. However, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts require the sponsor or the CRO to provide a letter to COFEPRIS describing the monitoring and auditing plan to be carried out during the investigation. MEX-84 and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts specify the letter must contain the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Type of plan: audit or monitoring
Frequency of application
Responsibility for monitoring, and where appropriate, cite the third party to carry out the activity
Objective and scope of monitoring
Evaluation tools and methodology implemented
Methodology to carry out scientific, technical, and ethical monitoring
Communication and notification strategies between the investigator, sponsor, ECs, and COFEPRIS
Profile of the monitor or auditor
Classification of findings and decision-making
Decision-making derived based on severity classification
Notification mechanism to the PI, ECs, and COFEPRIS
Design of the Action Plan: Corrective, Improvement, or Preventive
Reporting results through the partial and annual technical report (See MEX-31 for the partial reporting form)
Note: COFEPRIS has not yet updated MEX-84, G-ResProtocolAmd, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts to align with the Agrmnt_ResProtProcs requirements. However, the ClinRegs team is regularly monitoring the COFEPRIS website for new developments and will post the most current sources when they become available.

COFEPRIS-GCP also states that the PI is responsible for reporting and guaranteeing the quality and validity of the data obtained during the investigation.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

Per HlthResRegs the PI, the REC (CEI), the institutional head or other authorized institutional officers, or the Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud) must order the immediate suspension or cancellation of a research study as soon as any adverse effect is identified that might become an ethical or technical impediment to continuing with the study. The health care institution will submit a report to the Secretariat within 15 business days following the day in which the suspension or cancellation of the study was agreed to, specifying the effect noticed, the measures adopted, and consequences produced. NOM-012-SSA3-2012 similarly states the head of the institution or establishment, the REC (CEI), the Research Committee, the Biosafety Committee (where applicable), or the PI must order the immediate suspension or cancellation of research, in the presence of any severe adverse effects, which become an ethical or technical impediment to continue with the study and notify the Secretariat in detail. The institutional head must notify the Secretariat of any adverse effect resulting from the experimental research within a maximum period of 15 working days from the event occurrence, including the care measures adopted, the identified sequelae, as well as a detailed report on the physical condition of the patient, which mentions whether the patient is free of any risk at the time of notification. In such case, the resumption of the research will require a new authorization. The investigator is also responsible for suspending the investigation if there is a risk of serious injury, disability, or death of the research participant in accordance with GenHlthLaw. Additionally, per NOM-220-SSA1-2016, institutions must notify the National Pharmacovigilance Center (CNFV) of a study’s suspension or cancellation within a maximum of 15 days. If the study is resumed, the CNFV must also be notified within a maximum of 15 working days following the study’s recommencement. The investigator is responsible for submitting safety reports to the CNFV.

MEX-32 delineates if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor should promptly inform the investigators/institutions and the regulatory authority(ies) of the termination or suspension and the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. The EC should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor or by the investigator/institution, as specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s). The EC should also be provided with a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension.

MEX-32 further indicates that if the trial is prematurely terminated or suspended for any reason, the investigator/institution should promptly inform the trial participants, ensure appropriate therapy and follow-up for the participants, and, where required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), inform the regulatory authority(ies). If the investigator terminates or suspends a trial without the sponsor’s prior agreement, the investigator should inform the institution where applicable, and the investigator/institution should promptly inform the sponsor and the EC and provide the sponsor and the EC with a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension. If the EC terminates or suspends its approval/favorable opinion of a trial, the investigator should inform the institution where applicable, and the investigator/institution should promptly notify the sponsor and provide the sponsor with a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

According to COFEPRIS-GCP, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) requires the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) to comply with the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32) for conducting clinical trials. Per MEX-32, the sponsor should utilize appropriately qualified individuals to supervise the overall conduct of the trial, to handle the data, to verify the data, to conduct the statistical analyses, and to prepare the trial reports.

In addition, per MEX-32, when using electronic trial data processing or handling systems or remote electronic trial data systems, the sponsor should:

Ensure and document that the electronic data processing system(s) conform(s) to the sponsor's established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistent intended performance
Maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) for using these systems
Ensure that the systems are designed to permit data changes in such a way that the data changes are documented and that there is no deletion of entered data
Maintain a security system that prevents unauthorized access to the data
Maintain a list of the individuals who are authorized to make data changes
Maintain adequate backup of the data
Safeguard the blinding, if any
See MEX-32 for additional data processing requirements.

Records Management

As indicated in MEX-32, the sponsor, or other owners of the data, should retain all of the sponsor-specific essential documents pertaining to the trial (see section 8 of MEX-32). The sponsor should retain all sponsor-specific essential documents in conformance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s) of the country(ies) where the investigational product (IP) is approved, and/or where the sponsor intends to apply for approval(s). If the sponsor discontinues the clinical development of an IP (i.e., for any or all indications, routes of administration, or dosage forms), the sponsor should maintain all sponsor-specific essential documents for at least two (2) years after formal discontinuation or in conformance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s).

MEX-32 also states the essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after the last marketing approval or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the IP. These documents should be retained for a longer period, however, if required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s) or if needed by the sponsor. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s)/institution(s) in writing of the need for record retention and should notify the investigator(s)/institution(s) when trial-related records are no longer needed.

In addition, as delineated in COFEPRIS-GCP, the principal investigator (PI) is responsible for preparing, integrating, using, filing, and ensuring the safekeeping of the research participant’s clinical file for a minimum of five (5) years in accordance with NOM-004-SSA3-2012, MEX-32, and Good Documentation Practices per NOM-164-SSA1-2015.

Per NOM-004-SSA3-2012, clinical records are the property of the institution or the medical services provider that generates them. However, the patient/participant has ultimate ownership rights over this information to protect their health and the confidentiality of their data. Consequently, because the documents are prepared in the interest and benefit of the patient/participant, they must be kept for a minimum period of five (5) years, which is calculated from the date of the last medical procedure/visit.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Responsible Parties

For the purposes of data protection in Mexico, PDP-PrivateLaw and PDP-Public delineate responsibilities of the “data controller.” In PDP-PrivateLaw, which regulates the right of private individuals and legal entities to protect their personal data, the data controller who carries out the processing of personal data is the “responsible” party (or “regulated subject”). The “person in charge” is a natural or legal person who, alone or jointly with others, processes personal data on behalf of the controller.

In comparison, in PDP-Public, which regulates personal data held by public entities, the data controller who decides on the processing of the data is the “responsible” party (or “obligated subject”). The “person in charge” is a natural or legal person, public or private, outside the organization of the responsible person, who alone or jointly with others, processes personal data on behalf of and for the account of the responsible person. Public entities that process personal data include government authorities at all levels (federal, state, municipal, and Mexico City), the three (3) branches of government (executive, legislative, judicial), autonomous bodies, political parties, and public trusts and funds.

In addition, PDP-Trnspcy, which guarantees access to public information and promotes transparency and accountability, also addresses personal data protection. It requires public entities to manage and safeguard personal data as part of their broader mandate to ensure access to publicly available information. Oversight is carried out by “guarantor authorities,” which are the federal and local authorities that oversee compliance across the executive, legislative, and judicial branches, and independent constitutional bodies.

Data Protection

PDP-PrivateLaw and PDP-Public provide the requirements, responsibilities, and restrictions for handling personal data in the private and public sectors respectively. Under both laws, the data controller or responsible party must comply with the principles of data protection: legality, purpose, loyalty, consent, quality, proportionality, information, and responsibility in the processing of personal data. The data controller or responsible party must also ensure that the personal data contained in the databases are accurate, complete, correct, and updated for the purposes for which they were collected.

According to both PDP-PrivateLaw and PDP-Public, the data controller or responsible party must also establish and maintain administrative, physical, and technical security measures to protect personal data against damage, loss, alteration, destruction, or unauthorized use, access, or processing. Under PDP-Public, the controller must also guarantee the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the data. PDP-PrivateLaw requires the data controller or responsible party to report immediately any security breaches occurring at any stage of personal data processing that significantly affect the property or moral rights of the data owners, so that they can take appropriate measures to defend their rights. Additionally, the data controller or responsible party must establish controls or mechanisms to ensure that all persons involved in processing maintain confidentiality. This obligation must continue even after their relationship with the data controller ends.

PDP-Public further provides that the data controller or the responsible party must analyze the causes of the breach and implement preventive and corrective actions in its work plan to adapt security measures and the processing of personal data, if applicable, to prevent the breach from recurring. The data controller or responsible party must promptly inform the data owner, and as appropriate, the Secretariat and the guarantor authorities (i.e., government bodies that oversee compliance with data protection obligations), of any violations that significantly affect property or moral rights. Notification must be made as soon as the violation is confirmed and once the responsible party has begun to take steps to initiate a comprehensive review of its impact, so that the affected data owners can take the appropriate measures to defend their rights.

PDP-PrivateLaw and PDP-Public also both delineate that any time, a data owner, or where applicable, their legal representative, may exercise their rights of access, rectification, cancellation, and opposition, known as ARCO rights. The exercise of any of the ARCO rights is not a prerequisite, nor does it prevent the exercise of any other rights. The data owner must have the right to:

Access their personal data, as well as to know information related to the conditions and generalities of their processing
Request the rectification or correction of their personal data when they are found to be inaccurate, incomplete, or outdated
Request the erasure of their personal data from the files, records, files, and systems, so that they are no longer in the data controller’s or responsible party’s possession
Object to the processing of their personal data or demand its cessation when: even if the processing is lawful, to prevent it from causing harm or damage; or, the personal data is subject to automated processing, which produces undesired legal effects or significantly affects the data owner’s interests, rights, or freedoms, and is intended to evaluate, without human intervention, certain personal aspects of their data, or to analyze or predict, in particular, their professional performance, economic situation, health status, sexual preferences, reliability, or behavior
Per PDP-PrivateLaw, the data owner’s right to object will not be exercised in cases where processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation imposed on the data controller. Additionally, the data controller should not be obliged to erase personal data when:

The data relate to the parties of a private, social, or administrative contract and are necessary for its development and fulfillment
The data must be processed by a legal provision
The erasure hinders judicial or administrative proceedings related to tax obligations, the investigation and prosecution of crimes, or the updating of administrative sanctions
The data are necessary to protect the data owner’s legally protected interests
The data are necessary to carry out an action based on the public interest
The data are necessary to comply with a legal obligation acquired by the data owner
The data are processed for prevention or for medical diagnosis, or for the management of health services, provided that such treatment is carried out by a health professional subject to a duty of secrecy
Please refer to PDP-PrivateLaw and PDP-Public for detailed information on the principles guiding the protection and handling of personal data. See also MEX-95 for additional information on the protection of personal data held by private parties.

Additionally, per PDP-Trnspcy, obligated subjects and individuals must be responsible for the personal data in their possession, and may not disseminate, distribute, or commercialize the personal data contained in the information systems, developed in the exercise of their functions, unless there has been the express consent, in writing or by a similar means of authentication, of the persons to whom the information refers. See PDP-Trnspcy for detailed requirements.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

As explained in PDP-PrivateLaw and PDP-Public, the consent document or “privacy notice” is a physical, electronic, or any format document generated by the data controller or responsible party, that is made available to the data owner prior to processing that informs them of the purpose of collecting their data. Processing must be limited to the fulfillment of purposes delineated in the privacy notice. If the data controller or responsible party intends to process the data for another purpose, the data owner’s consent must be obtained again. PDP-Public specifies that the data controller or responsible party may process personal data for purposes other than those established in the privacy notice, provided that it has the authority granted by applicable law and the data owner has given their consent, unless the data owner has been reported missing, in accordance with the terms set forth in this law and other applicable provisions.

PDP-PrivateLaw and PDP-Public further explain that the consent may be given expressly or tacitly. Consent is understood to be expressed when the data owner’s will is expressed verbally, in writing, by electronic means, optically, with unequivocal signs, or by any other technology. Consent is tacit when the privacy notice has been made available to the owner, but the owner does not express their will to the contrary. As a general rule, tacit consent will be valid, unless the applicable legal provisions require that the data owner’s consent will be expressly stated. Per PDP-PrivateLaw, consent may be revoked at any time without retroactive effects being attributed to it. To revoke consent, the data controller must specify the mechanisms and procedures to be followed in the privacy notice.

PDP-PrivateLaw and PDP-Public state that in the case of sensitive data, the data owner or responsible party is required to obtain the data owner’s express written consent. PDP-PrivateLaw further indicates that the consent should be obtained through a written or electronic signature, or any authentication mechanism established for that purpose. Databases containing sensitive personal data may not be created without justifying their creation for legitimate, concrete purposes, and in accordance with the specified activities delineated and pursued by the data controller or responsible party. The data controller or the responsible party must also make reasonable efforts to limit the processing to the minimum time necessary.

As delineated in PDP-PrivateLaw and PDP-Public, the data controller or the responsible party will not be required to obtain consent when processing sensitive data in the following cases (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

When an applicable law authorizes such processing
There is a court order, resolution, or well-founded and reasoned mandate from a competent authority
When sensitive personal data transfers are made between those responsible, the transfers are compatible with the original purpose that motivated the processing of personal data
When there is a judicial order, resolution, or well-founded and motivated mandate of the competent authority
For the recognition or defense of the owner's rights before the competent authority
When personal data is required to exercise a right or fulfill obligations derived from a legal relationship between the owner and the person in charge
When there is an emergency that could potentially harm an individual or the individual’s property
When personal data is necessary to carry out a treatment for the prevention, diagnosis, or provision of health care
When the personal data is contained in publicly accessible sources
When personal data is subject to a prior dissociation procedure
When the owner of the personal data is a person reported missing under the terms of the law on the matter
Also, as outlined in PDP-PrivateLaw, when a data controller or responsible party intends to transfer personal data to national or foreign third parties, the privacy notice and the purposes to which the data owner subjected the processing must be communicated. National or international data transfers carried out with the data owner’s consent may be necessary when it is:

Provided for in a law or treaty to which Mexico is a party
Necessary for medical prevention or diagnosis, the provision of health care, medical treatment, or the management of health services
Made to holding companies, subsidiaries, or affiliates under the data controller’s common control, or to a parent company, or to any company of the same group that operates under the same internal processes and policies
Necessary by virtue of a contract entered into, or to be entered into, in the data owner’s interest, by the data controller and a third party
Necessary or legally required to safeguard a public interest, or to procure or administer justice
Necessary for the recognition, exercise, or defense of a right in a judicial proceeding
Necessary for the maintenance or fulfilment of a legal relationship between the data controller and the data owner
Please refer to PDP-PrivateLaw and PDP-Public for detailed consent and privacy notice requirements.

Consent for Processing Personal Data of Minors

Per PDP-Public, in processing the personal data of minors, the best interest of the children and adolescents must be prioritized in accordance with the applicable legal provisions.

MEX-4 further states legal guardians must always give consent when processing children’s personal data. This applies to any individual younger than 18 years of age.

(See the Children/Minors section for additional information on consent requirements for children/minors.)

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Mexican clinical trials, a freely given informed consent is required from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in HlthResRegs, GenHlthLaw, NOM-004-SSA3-2012, and COFEPRIS-GCP. Per COFEPRIS-GCP, the principal investigator (PI) is required to comply with the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32) in obtaining and documenting informed consent, and per G-RECs-Op-2018, the PI must also comply with consent requirements as delineated in the Declaration of Helsinki (MEX-76). (Note: Per MEX-2, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) is in the process of implementing the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MEX-22)).

As per HlthResRegs and G-RECs-Op-2018, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by a Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)) and provided to COEFPRIS with the request for research protocol authorization. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.)

HlthResRegs, COFEPRIS-GCP, and NOM-012-SSA3-2012 state that the PI must provide detailed research study information to the participant or legal representative/guardian. As delineated in HlthResRegs, G-RECs-Op-2018, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, MEX-32, and MEX-84, the ICF content should be presented with a clear explanation and provided in a format that facilitates understanding. Per NOM-012-SSA3-2012 and MEX-32, the participant or legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate. GenHlthLaw and MEX-84 further note the ICF should be expressed in writing in an accessible, timely manner and in an understandable language, using accurate and complete information, including the possible benefits and expected risks, and the treatment alternatives, to ensure that services are provided on the basis of free and informed consent. Once comprehension of the information is guaranteed through the necessary means and supports, individuals have the right to accept or reject consent. G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, MEX-84, and G-HumResProt indicate the ICF and/or assent form, as applicable, is a document through which the research participant agrees to voluntarily participate in a research study and to undergo experimental procedures when the information is presented in a sufficient, timely, clear, and truthful manner regarding the expected risk and benefits.

As per HlthResRegs, G-RECs-Op-2018, and MEX-32, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or appear to waive their legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representatives from their liabilities for any negligence.

Re-Consent

According to G-RECs-Op-2018 and MEX-32, any change in the ICF that is relevant to the participant’s consent should be approved by the REC (CEI) prior to implementing any changes. Per G-RECs-Op-2018 and MEX-32, the participant or legal representative/guardian should also be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participating in the trial. MEX-32 further states the communication of this information should be documented.

Language Requirements

G-HumResProt states that the applicant must submit the request for protocol authorization application and all associated documentation (including the protocol and the ICF) in Spanish.

Documenting Consent

As delineated in HlthResRegs, G-RECs-Op-2018, and MEX-32, the participant or legal representative/guardian, as well as two (2) witnesses, must sign the ICF. MEX-32 specifies that the ICF should be dated, and any updates must also be signed, and a copy of the amendments provided to the participant or legal representative/guardian. If the participant does not know how to sign, the participant will provide a fingerprint and will also need to designate someone to sign the participant’s name on their behalf. A copy of the signed ICF will be provided to the participant or legal representative/guardian. Per G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, which complies with MEX-22, the ICF version and date must coincide with what is recorded as approved in the opinions of the ethics committees (ECs). G-HumResProt further specifies the ICF should be signed by the PI, the participant and the participant’s family, or a legal representative and two (2) witnesses. The names of the witnesses, the addresses, and the relationships the witnesses have with the research participant must be indicated. MEX-84 also notes a section in the ICF should be provided for the participant or the legal representative to sign the document to indicate express acceptance. The section must include general data (full name, address, relationship with the participant) and signatures of two (2) witnesses.

Waiver of Consent

No information is currently available regarding waiver requirements.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
As delineated in G-RECs-Op-2018 and MEX-84, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Identification data (title, protocol number, version, version date, research institution data, principal investigator (PI) name, medical emergency establishment data, and Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)), and this data must coincide with the opinions of the ethics committees)
The study rationale and objectives
Purpose and procedures, including all invasive procedures
Identification of experimental aspects of the study
Trial duration
Participant’s responsibilities
Investigator responsibilities
Approximate number of participants
Circumstances that may terminate the study
Duration of study
Any expected risks or discomforts to the participant
Any expected benefits to the participant; if no benefit is expected, the participant should be informed of this point (physical examination, laboratory tests and imaging should not be considered as benefits to the participant)
Alternative treatments that may be beneficial to the participant
Trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
Explains the blinding of the study (if applicable) and what it consists of
Allocation method
Compensation and/or treatment available for the participant by the health care institution in the case of trial-related injury
All drugs, products, and procedures are free
That participation is voluntary, and that the participant can withdraw from the study at any time without penalty or loss of benefits, including medical treatment, to which the participant is otherwise entitled
Assurance that the participant will not be identified and that their confidential information relating to their privacy will be maintained
Confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained (including sensitive personal data and data derived from the study), and permission given to monitors, auditors, the REC (CEI), and the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) to access the participant’s medical records to verify the procedures or trial data, without violating the participant’s confidentiality, insofar as the applicable laws and regulations permit
Contact information for the sponsor and PI in the event of participant problems or trial-related injuries
Communication channels and data to request clarification and to guarantee a response to questions and clarification of concerns about procedures, risks, benefits, and other matters related to the investigation and treatment of the participant
Foreseeable circumstances under which the PI(s) may remove the participant without their consent
Commitment to provide updated information throughout the study although this may affect the participant’s willingness to continue
Notification that any additional research study expenses will be absorbed by the research budget
The Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32) also mentions the following required elements:

Any expected risks or discomforts, when applicable, to the embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
Any anticipated prorated payment to the participant for participating in the trial
Any expenses the participant needs to pay to participate in the trial
Additionally, per NOM-012-SSA3-2012, the investigator must ensure that the ICF explicitly states the compensation to which the research participant is entitled in the event of suffering damage to their health directly attributable to the research, and the availability of free medical treatment, even in the event the participant decides to withdraw from the study before it is concluded.

See HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, G-RECs-Op-2018, and MEX-32 for additional details related to ICF requirements. (Note: Per MEX-2, COFEPRIS is in the process of implementing the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MEX-22)).

Also, see the Vulnerable Populations and Consent for Specimen sections for further information.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Overview

In accordance with HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, G-RECs-Op-2018, and the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32), Mexico’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. (COFEPRIS-GCP requires the principal investigator (PI) to comply with MEX-32). HlthResRegs and MEX-32 state that a participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process. (Note: Per MEX-2, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) is in the process of implementing the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MEX-22)).

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As stated in HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, G-RECs-Op-2018, MEX-32, and MEX-84, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As per HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, G-RECs-Op-2018, MEX-32, and MEX-84, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation or treatment in the case of injury, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

According to G-RECs-Op-2018, MEX-32, and MEX-84, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. In addition, per NOM-004-SSA3-2012, although clinical records are the property of the institution or the medical services provider that generates them, the participant has ultimate ownership rights over this information to protect their health and the confidentiality of their data.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

MEX-32 states that the research participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the individual responsible for addressing trial-related inquiries and/or their rights. G-RECs-Op-2018 further specifies that the names and contact information of the PI and the Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI))’s president, including a 24-hour telephone number in case of emergency, should be provided.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

HlthResRegs, NOM-012-SSA3-2012, G-RECs-Op-2018, COFEPRIS-GCP, and MEX-32, which upholds the Declaration of Helsinki (MEX-76), clearly state that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of their health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

See the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
The HlthResRegs and the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32) make provisions to protect the rights of a research participant during the informed consent process when the procedure is complicated by medical emergencies (COFEPRIS-GCP requires the principal investigator (PI) to comply with MEX-32). (Note: Per MEX-2, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) is in the process of implementing the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MEX-22)).

According to HlthResRegs, in an emergency, when it is deemed necessary to use an investigational drug, or a known drug with indications, doses, or routes of administration other than the established uses, the treating physician must obtain the favorable opinion of the Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)) and the Research Committee, and an informed consent form (ICF) signed by the research participant or legal representative/guardian. The terms under which this documentation is obtained must meet the following requirements:

The REC (CEI) and Research Committee will be informed of the use of the investigational drug in advance if the researcher can anticipate the need for use in emergency situations. If this is not possible, an opinion must be obtained after the situation occurs. In both cases, the committees will issue an opinion in favor of or against approving the planned or recurring unintended use of the drug.
A signed ICF must be obtained from the participant or legal representative/guardian unless the participant’s condition prevents them from signing the form, the legal representative/guardian are not available to sign the form, or stopping use of the drug constitutes an almost absolute risk of death to the participant.
Per MEX-32, in emergency situations, when prior consent of the participant is not possible, the consent of the legal representative/guardian, if present, should be requested. When prior consent of the participant or legal representative/guardian cannot be obtained, the ethics committee must provide documented approval in order to protect the participant’s rights, safety, and well-being, pursuant to the applicable regulations. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible, and consent to continue and other consent should be requested, as appropriate.

In addition, per GenHlthLaw, in cases of medical emergency, and when the terminally ill patient is unable to express their consent, and in the absence of family members, a legal representative, guardian or trusted person, the specialist doctor, and/or the institution’s Bioethics Committee will make the decision to apply a necessary surgical medical procedure or treatment.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Overview

As delineated in G-RECs-Op-2018, in all Mexican clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. G-RECs-Op-2018 characterizes vulnerable populations as individuals or groups experiencing diminished autonomy due to imposing social, political, and/or economic situations that prevent them from having control over their quality of life. Populations traditionally viewed as vulnerable include minors, women, persons with disabilities, the elderly, those suffering from mental illness, immigrants, those who are illiterate, those belonging to ethnic or racial minorities, the unemployed, the homeless, and reclusive individuals.

As per COFEPRIS-GCP, the principal investigator (PI) is required to comply with the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32), which similarly characterizes vulnerable populations as those who may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation, or of a retaliatory response from not participating. Examples are members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students; subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel; employees of the pharmaceutical industry; members of the armed forces; and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable subjects include patients with incurable diseases, persons in nursing homes, unemployed or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent. (Note: Per MEX-2, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) is in the process of implementing the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MEX-22)).

G-RECs-Op-2018 specifies that Research Ethics Committees (RECs) (Comités de Ética en Investigación (CEIs)) should ensure that additional security mechanisms are implemented to minimize the specific risks for each group. MEX-32 similarly states that ethics committees must pay special attention to protecting participants who are from vulnerable populations.

See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations. Information on the other vulnerable populations specified in HlthResRegs is provided below.

Persons in Dependent Groups

As indicated in HlthResRegs, for clinical trials involving participants who are involved in subordinate or dependent relationships, the REC (CEI) must ensure the following:

Participation or refusal of individuals to participate or withdrawal of consent during the study, will not affect their school, work, military status, or that which is related to the judicial process and any conditions of compliance with a sentence, if applicable
Research results are not used to the detriment of the individuals involved
The health institution and sponsors take responsibility for dangers associated with medical treatment, and where appropriate, provide legally required compensation for the harmful consequences of the investigation
Per G-RECs-Op-2018, the following criteria must also be met to conduct a study with a subordinate population:

The PI must clearly define the reasons for planning to recruit a subordinate population
Protocol approval must also be obtained in which a written statement from the immediate boss or corresponding authority of the subordinate participant(s) verifying that no coercion existed
If resident doctors or partners are recruited for the study, the program director must provide the REC (CEI) with a letter of support issued by a person without ties to the study
Confidentiality of research data for the group of subordinate and student participants is important to consider to avoid negatively impacting the participants’ employment possibilities, professional development, study plans, or social relationships. The REC (CEI) will also need to pay special attention to the PI’s plans to safeguard data security
The HlthResRegs and G-RECs-Op-2018 further specify that these relationships include participants who are in junior or subordinate positions in hierarchically structured groups, such as students, employees, workers in laboratories and hospitals, members of the armed forces, prisoners, social rehabilitation centers, and other members of special population groups in which informed consent can be influenced by some authority.

Persons in Local Communities

As per HlthResRegs, clinical trials involving participants in local communities must meet the following requirements:

Research will be permitted when the expected benefit is reasonably assured, and when previous studies carried out on a small scale have not produced conclusive results
The PI must obtain the approval of the health authorities and other civil authorities of the community to be studied, in addition to obtaining informed consent from individuals who are included in the trial
In the case of vulnerable communities due to their economic or social conditions, such as indigenous communities, the REC (CEI) is also required to issue a favorable opinion
Experimental investigations in communities may only be carried out by establishments that have the Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud)’s prior authorization
The experimental design should offer practical measures of protection for research participants, and ensure that valid results will be obtained, involving the minimum number of participants
The most pertinent ethical considerations applicable to research on participants must be extrapolated to the communal context
Terminally Ill Persons

As stated in GenHlthLaw, if a terminally ill person is a minor, or is incapable of expressing their consent, consent should be provided by the parent(s)/guardian(s), and in their absence, by their legal representative(s).

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Per GenChldRtsLaw, a child is defined as under 12 years of age, and adolescents are those between 12 and 18 years of age. For the purposes of the age of majority, children are those under 18 years of age. When there is doubt as to whether the person is over 18 years of age, it should be presumed that the person is an adolescent. When there is doubt as to whether the person is over or under 12 years of age, it should be presumed that the person is a child.

Additionally, per HlthResRegs, in all cases, a written informed consent must be obtained from those exercising parental authority, or the legal guardian(s) of the minor, except in the case of emancipated minors over 16 years of age. Moreover, when the mental capacity or psychological state of the minor or incapacitated person permits, their acceptance must also be obtained after the investigator(s) have explained what they intend to do in the study. However, the Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)) may waive compliance with these requirements for justified reasons.

As set forth in G-RECs-Op-2018 and HlthResRegs, a research study involving minors must ensure that similar studies have been previously done in older people and in immature animals, except when it comes to studying conditions that are specific to the neonatal stage or specific conditions associated with certain ages.

Per G-RECs-Op-2018, research studies classified as risky and likely to benefit the minor directly, will be admissible when the following requirements are met:

The risk is justified by the importance of the benefit that the minor will receive
The benefit is equal to or greater than other alternatives already established for its diagnosis and treatment
When the mental capacity and psychological state of the minor allow, the informed assent must also be obtained, after explaining what is intended to be done. The REC (CEI) may waive compliance with these requirements for justified reasons
The informed consent information provided is appropriate for the understanding of minors
Per G-RECs-Op-2018 and HlthResRegs, when two (2) persons exercise the parental authority of a minor, only the consent of one (1) of them must be permitted if there is irrefutable or manifest proof that the other is unable to provide it, proof of the parental authority’s negligence, or imminent risk to the minor’s health or life.

HlthResRegs indicates that investigations classified as risky, and with a probability of direct benefit for the minor, will be permitted in the following circumstances:

The risk is justified by the importance of the benefit that the minor will receive, and
The benefit is equal to or greater than other alternatives already established for diagnosis and treatment
Per HlthResRegs, investigations classified as risky and without direct benefit to the minor, will be allowed in the following circumstances:

When the risk is minimal: The intervention or procedure must represent a reasonable experience for minors, and comparable with those characteristics of their current or expected medical, psychological, social, or educational situation. Also, the intervention or procedure should have high probability of obtaining generalizable knowledge about the condition or illness of the minor to benefit others with this disorder as well
When the risk is greater than the minimum: The research should offer a good chance of understanding, preventing, or alleviating a serious problem affecting the health and well-being of children. Also, the head of the health institution should establish strict supervision to evaluate the magnitude of the risks anticipated or others that may arise, and immediately suspend the investigation when the risk could affect the biological, psychological, or social welfare of the minor
Assent Requirements

The applicable regulatory requirements do not specify the age of assent required for minors.

Per G-RECs-Op-2018, assent must also be obtained from a minor who is deemed capable of providing assent, and the minor must be informed about the study in a manner tailored to their emotional and intellectual maturity level, considering at all times the seriousness of the decision.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
As per HlthResRegs, studies involving women of childbearing age; women who are in any stage of pregnancy or are postpartum; or studies involving treatments or procedures using embryos, fetuses, or newborns, are required to obtain an informed consent form (ICF) from the woman and her spouse or partner. In addition, HlthResRegs and G-RECs-Op-2018 note that consent from the spouse or partner may only be waived in the case of their incapacity (or irrefutable or manifest inability) to provide it, or when there is imminent risk to the health or life of the woman, embryo, fetus, or newborn. All studies must also comply with the general ethics requirements that must be fulfilled prior to research involving humans as delineated in HlthResRegs.

HlthResRegs and G-RECs-Op-2018 further state that research in pregnant women will only be permitted if it is for therapeutic benefit, and represents an opportunity to understand, prevent, or alleviate any serious pathology. HlthResRegs and G-RECs-Op-2018 indicate that these studies are allowed when they are aimed at improving a pregnant woman’s health with minimal risk to the embryo or fetus, or per HlthResRegs, seek to increase the fetus’s viability, with minimal risk to a pregnant woman. G-RECs-Op-2018 adds that the ICF should mention the possible risk to the fetus.

According to HlthResRegs, investigations to be carried out on pregnant women should be preceded by studies carried out on non-pregnant woman to demonstrate the study’s safety, with the exception of studies requiring the specific condition. Those investigations classified as higher than minimum risk and will be conducted using women of childbearing age should implement the following measures:

Certify the women are not pregnant prior to their acceptance as research participants, and
Decrease the chances of pregnancy as much as possible during the development of the investigation
Per HlthResRegs and G-RECs-Op-2018, during studies conducted with pregnant women, the following requirements must be met:

The investigators will not have the authority to decide on the time, method, or procedure used to terminate the pregnancy, nor will they participate in decisions regarding the viability of the fetus
The Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI))’s authorization is required prior to any modification of the method used to terminate the pregnancy. These modifications mean that there will be minimal risk to the mother’s health and do not represent any risk to the survival of the fetus, and
In any case, it is strictly forbidden to grant monetary or other incentives to interrupt the pregnancy, for the interest of the investigation or for other reasons
As set forth in HlthResRegs and G-RECs-Op-2018, investigators must comply with the following additional criteria when conducting studies with women who are in any stage of pregnancy or are postpartum:

Research without therapeutic benefit in pregnant women, whose objective is to obtain general knowledge about pregnancy, should not represent a risk greater than the minimum for the woman, the embryo, or the fetus
Investigations in pregnant women that imply an intervention or experimental procedure not related to pregnancy, but with therapeutic benefit for women (e.g., cases of toxemia gravidarum, diabetes, hypertension, and neoplasms, etc.) should not expose the embryo or the fetus to a greater than minimum risk, except when the use of the intervention or procedure is justified to save the life of the woman
For investigations during labor, the informed consent must be obtained prior to initiating the study and must expressly state that consent may be withdrawn at any time during labor
Investigations in women during the puerperium will be allowed when they do not interfere with the health of the mother and the newborn
Research on women during lactation will be authorized when there is no risk for the infant, or when the mother decides not to breastfeed, she ensures her feeding by another method and provides informed consent
Per HlthResRegs, studies involving treatments or procedures using embryos, fetuses, or newborns must meet the following requirements:

Fetuses will be permitted to be subjects of investigation only if the techniques and means used provide maximum security for them and the pregnant woman
Newborns will not be used as subjects of investigation until it has been established with certainty whether or not they are live births, except when the research is aimed at increasing their probability of survival until the viability phase, the study procedures do not cause the cessation of their vital functions or when, without adding any risk, they seek to obtain important generalizable knowledge that cannot be obtained in any other way
Live births may be used as subjects of investigation if the investigator(s) obtain consent from the woman and her spouse or partner
In addition, HlthResRegs indicates that investigations involving embryos, deaths, fetuses, still births, macerated fetal matter, cells, tissues, and the use of biological materials extracted from them, must comply with GenHlthLaw. GenHlthLaw specifically prohibits the use, for any purpose, of embryonic or fetal tissues caused by induced abortions. G-RECs-Op-2018, by comparison, states that for investigators to use biological materials derived from abortions, the informed consent must be independent from the consent granted for an abortion and will not include financial compensation.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
No applicable requirements

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
The Mexican government has updated the GenHlthLaw to prioritize mental health with the development of health policies required to be in accordance with the provisions of the MexConstitution and international treaties on human rights. For the purposes of this law, mental health is understood as a state of physical, mental, emotional, and social well-being determined by the individual's interaction with society and linked to the full exercise of human rights. Refer to GenHlthLaw for details on consent requirements for the treatment of the mental health services user population.

Per HlthResRegs, when the mental capacity and psychological state of the participant permits, their acceptance must also be obtained after the investigator(s) explain what they intend to do during a clinical study. The Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI)) may waive compliance with these requirements for justified reasons. All studies must also comply with the general ethics requirements that must be fulfilled prior to research involving humans as delineated in HlthResRegs.

As indicated in HlthResRegs, investigations classified as risky, but with a probability of direct benefit for the mentally incompetent participant, will be allowed when:

The risk is justified by the importance of the benefit that the incompetent participant will receive, and
The benefit is equal to or greater than other alternatives already established for diagnosis and treatment
In addition, per HlthResRegs, investigations classified as risky and without direct benefit to the mentally incompetent, will be allowed in the following circumstances:

When the risk is minimal: The intervention or procedure must represent a reasonable experience for the incompetent participant and be comparable with those characteristics of their current or expected medical, psychological, social, or educational situation. The intervention or procedure should also have a high probability of obtaining generalizable knowledge about the condition or illness of the mentally incompetent participant to benefit others with this disorder
When the risk is greater than the minimum: The research should offer a good chance of understanding, preventing, or alleviating a serious problem affecting the health and well-being of the mentally incapacitated. In addition, the head of the health institution should establish strict supervision to evaluate the magnitude of the risks anticipated or others that may arise, and immediately suspend the investigation when the risk could affect the biological, psychological, or social welfare of the mentally incompetent participant.
Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
As delineated in COFEPRIS-GCP and the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32), an investigational product (IP) is defined as any pharmaceutical form containing an active ingredient or placebo, or a product of biological or biotechnological origin that is used or tested in a clinical trial, including a registered product when used or packaged in a way different from which it was authorized, or when it is tested for indications that have not been authorized, or when it is used to obtain more information about its authorized use. COFEPRIS-GCP also notes this definition also applies to new chemical and biological entities, generics, new formulations, combination products, and biosimilars, and medical devices with or without the release of some active ingredient.

NOM-012-SSA3-2012 similarly states that investigational medicines or devices are used or applied to humans for scientific research purposes, for which there is insufficient scientific evidence to demonstrate its preventative, therapeutic, or rehabilitative effectiveness, or is intended to modify the therapeutic indications of already known products.

NOM-059-SSA1-2015 further defines an IP as a drug or biological product for which there is no previous experience in the country, has not been registered by the Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud), and therefore, has not been distributed commercially. This definition also encompasses medicines registered and approved for sale, when they are being investigated for an unapproved indication, dose, or route of administration, including their use in combination with other products that are different from the approved use.

(Note: In Mexico, IPs are also referred to as “drugs/products in research”).

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Manufacturing

According to GenHlthLaw, Reg-COFEPRIS, and Reg-HlthProd, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of all drug products for human use, including investigational products (IPs), in Mexico. Pursuant to GenHlthLaw, COFEPRIS, acting on behalf of the Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud), also issued NOM-059-SSA1-2015 and NOM-164-SSA1-2015 to provide standards delineating the minimum requirements necessary for the manufacture of drugs or active ingredients to be marketed in the country or used in clinical research. See NOM-059-SSA1-2015-Annexes to access the annexes to NOM-059-SSA1-2015.

As indicated in GenHlthLaw and Reg-HlthProd, drug manufacturers must submit a request to COFEPRIS to obtain a health registration prior to initiating any drug manufacturing activities. Reg-HlthProd states that COFEPRIS must complete its review in 60 days, or the application will be deemed approved. Per GenHlthLaw, the health registration is valid for five (5) years. The health registration may be extended for an additional five (5) years if the extension is requested prior to the expiration of the current authorization, or the registration will be cancelled or revoked. See also GenHlthLaw and Reg-HlthProd, for detailed drug manufacturer registration submission requirements. In addition, per MEX-110, COFEPRIS is recognized as a National Regulatory Authority of Regional Reference of Medicines and Biological Products by the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)/World Health Organization (WHO), and per MEX-111, is also a member of Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S). Per MEX-2, COFEPRIS has also implemented the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH)’s Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Good Manufacturing Practice Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (Q7) (MEX-81).

Import

As delineated in GenHlthLaw, Reg-COFEPRIS, Reg-HlthProd, and G-UnregDrugImprts, COFEPRIS is also responsible for authorizing the import of IPs. According to Reg-HlthProd and G-UnregDrugImprts, an applicant or the legal representative may submit a request to import an IP after COFEPRIS has approved the health authorization request for those drugs that are neither narcotic nor psychotropic, that do not have health registrations, and that are intended to be used for human research. As per GenHlthLaw, the applicant must be a resident of Mexico or have a legal representative submit an import request on the applicant’s behalf.

Per Reg-HlthProd, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, foreign manufacturers must submit a license, a good manufacturing practices (GMP) certificate, or a document issued by the competent authority in the country of origin that proves the company has permission to manufacture drugs. See MEX-36 for additional information on obtaining a GMP certificate.

Additionally, as provided in Agrmnt_GMPCert, COFEPRIS has issued an agreement establishing the use of a regulatory “reliance” model for GMP certification. Under this agreement, COFEPRIS will recognize the GMP certificates or equivalent documents for drugs and medicines issued by Recognized Regulatory Authorities (RRA). RRAs include:

National Regulatory Authorities that are PIC/S members
National Regulatory Authorities included in the WHO List of Authorities (WLAs)
Regional Reference National Regulatory Authorities (RRNs)
National Regulatory Authorities of the country of origin, exclusively for foreign-manufactured drugs
Per Agrmnt_GMPCert, COFEPRIS will also consider Certificates of Pharmaceutical Product (CPP) that demonstrate GMP compliance when the issuing authority does not provide a GMP certificate. See Agrmnt_GMPCert for detailed requirements governing the reliance model for GMP certificates.

Per NOM-059-SSA1-2015-Mod, COFEPRIS uses the reliance model to recognize GMP certificates from National Regulatory Authorities (e.g., PIC/S members, WLAs, or those with equivalence agreements) to ensure access to new, safe, effective, and high-quality therapeutic options for the treatment of diseases requiring advanced therapies (mainly biotechnological drugs), such as cancer, diabetes and mellitus. See NOM-059-SSA1-2015-Mod for additional information.

Reg-HlthProd further states that COFEPRIS may grant permission to import raw materials or finished products without health registration only in the following cases:

When a contingency arises
When required by health policy
For purposes of scientific research, registration, or personal use, or
For laboratory tests
In addition, Reg-HlthProd indicates that three (3) types of sanitary import permits may be issued:

Definitive import – authorizes the entry of products to remain in the national territory for an unlimited time
Temporary import – authorizes the entry of products for a limited time and with a specific purpose, with the understanding that they must return to the country of origin in a period not exceeding one (1) year
Import in transit – authorizes the entry of products for their transfer from one (1) national office to another, for their departure to leave the country, within a period not exceeding 30 days, and for sale or temporary distribution. The sale or distribution is authorized exclusively for medicines to be used for strategic purposes
Reg-HlthProd, MEX-84, G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, and G-UnregDrugImprts state that an import request may be submitted to COFEPRIS once the agency has authorized the protocol for research to be conducted on human beings. The following documentation should be included (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Authorizations, Certificates and Visits Form (see MEX-25) (original)
Proof of payment of fees (original and two (2) copies)
Health License
Notice of Operation (original and one (1) copy)
Approval from the research protocol office authorized by COFEPRIS and its amendments, (only in the case of research on human beings) (original and one (1) copy)
Power of attorney
Technical and scientific information demonstrating the identity and purity of its components in accordance with Pharmacopoeia of the United Mexican States (Farmacopea de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos (FEUM)) and its supplements; the stability of the finished product in accordance with the corresponding standards; and therapeutic efficacy and safety according to the corresponding scientific information
Prescribing information (broad and reduced versions)
Sample label
Free sale certificate issued by the health authority of the country of origin
Certificate that the company has permission to manufacture medicines and proof of GMP issued by the corresponding authority of the country of origin
Letter of representation, when the laboratory that manufactures the import product abroad is not a subsidiary or parent company of the laboratory requesting the registration
Letter of delegation of responsibility to the importer signed by the sponsor
Letter of acceptance of responsibility from the importer signed by the importer’s legal representative
In addition, Reg-HlthProd requires documents originating from a foreign country to be presented in Spanish, or if in another language, with a Spanish translation made by an expert translator.

Per Reg-HlthProd and G-UnregDrugImprts, COFEPRIS has 10 days to approve the request. If COFEPRIS does not respond within this timeframe, the request is deemed approved. G-UnregDrugImprts also notes that COFEPRIS has eight (8) business days to send the applicant a prevention notification requesting missing or additional information required. The applicant, in turn, has five (5) business days to respond. Reg-HlthProd and G-UnregDrugImprts further states that the maximum validity of import authorizations is 180 days, which may be extended for an equal period, provided the conditions in which they have been granted have not changed.

In addition, as set forth in Agrmnt_RegHlthSup, COFEPRIS issued an agreement adopting the WHO’s Good Reliance Practices for evaluating health registration applications. Under this framework, COFEPRIS may consider and rely upon the decisions of other RRAs to determine whether their requirements, tests, and evaluation procedures are equivalent to those conducted in Mexico for ensuring the quality, safety, efficacy, and performance of health supplies. In reviewing these applications, COFEPRIS will also consider the regulatory decisions of other RRAs, as well as the evaluations carried out by the WHO’s Prequalification Programme.

Per Agrmnt_RegHlthSup, for the treatment of emerging diseases, neglected tropical diseases, or in cases of national emergency, the Ministry must determine the medicines, vaccines, and medical devices that may be acquired through the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)’s Strategic Fund or Revolving Fund (regional pooled procurement mechanisms), or through other procurement mechanisms, which will be imported for the prevention and control of diseases and health emergencies. Vaccines, medicines, and medical devices that have been acquired by the Ministry through these procurement mechanisms are exempt from health registration in Mexico. When the products are of biological origin, they are also exempt from obtaining a distribution or sale authorization. In the case of vaccines, medicines, and medical devices that have been acquired at the Ministry’s request, more than one (1) import permit may be requested under this Agreement, in accordance with the request made in an official letter submitted to COFEPRIS. See Agrmnt_RegHlthSup for additional information on COFEPRIS’s reliance model for health registration and on the import mechanisms for public health emergencies.

Mexico also has rules that govern how pharmaceutical products are transported and imported. D-CargoTransprt bars exclusive cargo shipments to the Mexico City International Airport (AICM). See D-CargoTransprt and D-ModCargoTransprt for more details regarding the relocation of cargo shipments to other airports in Mexico.

Please note: Mexico is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (MEX-5), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see MEX-35.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

As indicated in MEX-2, Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) is in the process of implementing the ICH Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MEX-22). Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts are in compliance with MEX-22 regarding investigational product (IP) quality/manufacturing and investigator’s brochure (IB) requirements (also known as researcher’s manual in Mexico), while COFEPRIS-GCP complies with the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32).

As set forth in GenHlthLaw, and G-HumResProt, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, MEX-84, and G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, which are in compliance with MEX-22, the applicant or sponsor is responsible for providing the investigators with an IB. MEX-22 specifies that the sponsor is generally responsible for ensuring that an updated IB is made available to the investigator(s), and the investigators are responsible for providing the updated IB to the responsible ethics committees (ECs). The sponsor should also update the IB as relevant new information becomes available. According to MEX-84, G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, and MEX-22, the IB should include the following elements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Title
Confidentiality statement
Table of contents
Summary
Introduction
IP identification data (IP number, generic name of the drug or device, international nonproprietary name, trade name, if applicable)
Collection of clinical and preclinical IP data relevant to the study of IP(s) in human participants
Preclinical information (includes non-clinical pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, and metabolism in animals, toxicology)
Clinical information (includes pharmacokinetics and metabolism in humans, safety and efficacy, experience during commercialization)
Data summary and guide for the investigator
Document version and version date (coinciding with the approving opinions of the ECs)
For drug authorization requests: (include IP physicochemical and pharmaceutical properties, formulation, presentation, manufacturing, labeling, storage, packaging and stability, when applicable, etc.)
For COFEPRIS-04-010-D modality (risk-free research (observational studies)) authorization requests: include prescribing information
MEX-84 further notes the purpose of the IB is to provide researchers and others involved in the trial with information to facilitate their understanding of the rationale for and compliance with key protocol features such as: dose, dose frequency/interval, administration methods, and safety monitoring. The IB also provides information to support the design of the clinical phase of the study participants over the course of the clinical trial. The information in this document must be presented in a concise, objective, and balanced manner which allows the principal investigator, as well as the other parties involved in the trial, to assess the suitability of the proposed trial, emphasizing the relevant and updated scientific information on the IP to monitor participant safety.

See MEX-84, G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, and MEX-22 for detailed IB guidelines.

Quality Management

As specified in COFEPRIS-GCP, GenHlthLaw, Reg-HlthProd, NOM-059-SSA1-2015, NOM-164-SSA1-2015, NOM-176-SSA1-1998, NOM-073-SSA1-2015, G-HumResProt, MEX-84, G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, and MEX-22, the sponsor must verify that the products are manufactured in accordance with the current codes of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP). See NOM-059-SSA1-2015-Annexes to access the annexes to NOM-059-SSA1-2015.

In accordance with the GenHlthLaw, Reg-HlthProd, NOM-059-SSA1-2015, NOM-164-SSA1-2015, NOM-176-SSA1-1998, Agrmnt_ResProtProcs, G-HumResProt, G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, and MEX-22, COFEPRIS requires that drug manufacturers ensure IPs meet the required safety, efficacy, and quality characteristics and are manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable GMP and provide the following additional information (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Issue the corresponding certificate of analysis signed by the health officer to verify the drugs comply with the quality specifications indicated in the current edition of the Pharmacopoeia of the United Mexican States (Farmacopea de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos (FEUM)) and its supplements, or those specified in the pharmacopeias from other countries, if applicable (per NOM-176-SSA1-1998)
In case of foreign manufacture, the manufacturer must have a GMP certification, license, or document proving that the manufacturer has permission to manufacture medicines, issued by the competent authority in the country of origin (per Reg-HlthProd)
MEX-84 further specifies that the following IP documentation is required to demonstrate compliance with GMP:

Letter under oath, declaring that the IP and placebo are manufactured under standards that ensure a product is safe for use and that it has the ingredients and potency it claims to have in accordance with established quality requirements, or
Certificate of good practices for the IP, or
Certificate of pharmaceutical product
Additionally, per GenHlthLaw, verification of GMP compliance must be conducted by the Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud) or the Ministry’s authorized third parties, or if necessary, recognition of the respective certificate issued by the competent authority of the country of origin, provided there are recognition agreements in place between the competent authorities from both countries. See MEX-36 for additional information on obtaining a GMP certificate.

NOM-059-SSA1-2015 also notes that the manufacture of IPs for use in clinical studies presents greater complexity than marketed drug products due to the lack of systematic procedures resulting from the variety of clinical trial designs. In addition to applying basic GMP principles, drugs for research use in Mexico must also be released in accordance with good clinical practices, and the personnel involved in IP production and control must be experienced in handling drugs in the clinical research phase and be familiar with GMP.

Per NOM-059-SSA1-2015-Mod, COFEPRIS also uses the reliance model to recognize a GMP certificate and quality control laboratory analyses from National Regulatory Authorities (e.g., Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S) members, World Health Organization (WHO) List of Authorities (WLAs), or those with equivalence agreements) to ensure access to new, safe, effective, and high-quality therapeutic options for the treatment of diseases requiring advanced therapies (mainly biotechnological drugs), such as cancer, diabetes and mellitus. See NOM-059-SSA1-2015-Mod for additional information.

In addition, per MEX-110, COFEPRIS is recognized as a National Regulatory Authority of Regional Reference of Medicines and Biological Products by the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)/WHO, and per MEX-111, is also a PIC/S member.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Mexico must comply with the requirements set forth in COFEPRIS-GCP, NOM-164-SSA1-2015, NOM-059-SSA1-2015, and the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32). (Note: Per MEX-2, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) is in the process of implementing the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MEX-22)).

As delineated in COFEPRIS-GCP and NOM-059-SSA1-2015, the IP label must be written in Spanish and contain, at a minimum, the following information (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor or main contact
Protocol identification number
Pharmaceutical form and route of administration
Manufacturer name and address
Lot number, identification code, and dosage form
Statements: “For clinical studies only” or "Permitted use only investigation, " "Forbidden marketing," and "Keep away from the reach of children"
Symbol or pictograms warning, if applicable
Expiration date
Storage conditions
NOM-164-SSA1-2015 also states that the IP label must indicate it is material under investigation.

In addition, MEX-22 indicates the sponsor should verify the IPs are coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if appropriate. In blinded trials, the IP coding system should include a mechanism that permits rapid identification of the product(s) in case of a medical emergency, but does not permit undetectable breaks of the blinding. A sample of the attached IP container label(s) should also be provided to document compliance with applicable labelling regulations and appropriateness of instructions provided to the study participants.

Per NOM-164-SSA1-2015 and NOM-059-SSA1-2015, IPs for use in clinical trials should be packaged in a way that protects the products from alteration, contamination, and damage during storage and shipment. Additionally, procedures or instructions for the control of packaging, labeling, and distribution operations should be prepared.

Per NOM-059-SSA1-2015, in the case of products packaged for blinded clinical studies, manufacturers must ensure that the unused products and supplies are completely (100%) retrieved.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

COFEPRIS-GCP and the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MEX-22) state the sponsor is responsible for supplying investigators with the investigational products (IP(s)) while ensuring that only the quantity of products necessary to carry out the study is provided, and that none of the products will be marketed or used for purposes unrelated to the investigation. (Note: Per MEX-2, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) is in the process of implementing MEX-22).

MEX-22 further specifies that the sponsor is responsible for supplying the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the IP(s) and for ensuring the timely delivery of the IPs. However, the sponsor should not supply an investigator/institution with the IP(s)) until all the required documentation is obtained, such as the favorable opinion of the ethics committee (EC) and approval from COFEPRIS.

The sponsor should ensure written procedures include instructions that the investigator/institution should follow for the handling and storage of IP(s), adequate and safe receipt of the IP(s), dispensing of the IP(s), retrieval of unused IP(s), return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor, and disposal of unused IP(s) by the sponsor (or alternative disposition if authorized by the sponsor and in compliance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s)).

Additionally, MEX-22 indicates the IP should be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP). The sponsor should determine acceptable storage temperatures, storage conditions (e.g., protection from light), storage times, reconstitution fluids and procedures, and devices for product infusion, if any, for the IPs, and inform all involved parties (e.g., monitors, investigators, pharmacists, storage managers) of these determinations. Additionally, the sponsor should:

Take steps to ensure that the IP(s) are stable over the period of use
Maintain sufficient quantities of the IP(s) used in the trials to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary, and maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics. To the extent stability permits, samples should be retained either until the analyses of the trial data are complete or as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), whichever represents the longer retention period
Refer to MEX-22 for detailed sponsor-related IP requirements and MEX-36 for additional information on obtaining a GMP certificate.

COFEPRIS-GCP also delineates the sponsor is responsible for ensuring that IP manufacturing complies with NOM-073-SSA1-2015, which states that during the clinical trial, the manufacturer must validate the stability of the IP until the date of the last administration. The sponsor and the contract research organization (CRO) are responsible for ensuring that the research institution has a restricted storage area to protect the IPs and other products required for the investigation, including adequate temperature controls, humidity, and other conditions according to the manufacturer’s provisions. Additionally, the principal investigator is required to keep track of the receipt, storage, distribution, administration, destruction, or retrieval of the IP and other products required for the clinical study, in accordance with the research protocol provisions.

In addition, NOM-164-SSA1-2015 and NOM-059-SSA1-2015 indicate that there must be a procedure for the retrieval of IPs for clinical use that describes the responsibilities of all the members of the supply chain using the drug to include the manufacturer, the sponsor, the investigator, the clinical monitor, and the head of the research unit. NOM-164-SSA1-2015 further states that a system must be in place for the release of each lot of manufactured IPs and that a qualified person must approve the release. See NOM-059-SSA1-2015-Annexes to access the annexes to NOM-059-SSA1-2015.

According to MEX-84, the following IP documentation is also required to be submitted to COFEPRIS:

Letter under oath guaranteeing the shelf life (stability) of the IP from the date of manufacture to the date of the last administration that will be carried out as part of the investigational protocol, or a protocol and report of results of the accelerated and long-term stability study of the IP and placebo, guaranteeing its stability from the date of manufacture to the date of the last administration in the research protocol
Letter under oath, declaring that the IP and placebo are manufactured under standards that ensure a product is safe for use and that it has the ingredients and potency it claims to have in accordance with established quality requirements; a certificate of good practices for the IP; or a certificate of pharmaceutical product
Letter of description of import inputs that expresses the approximate quantity of the IP
MEX-84 further notes that compliance with GMP and product stability are not equivalent. In the case of a letter under oath, it is valid to declare together compliance with GMP and that the shelf life of the IP is guaranteed at least until the date of the last administration of the IP and/or placebo.

In addition, per G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts, a letter of import supplies should be provided to COFEPRIS that clearly establishes the quantity and description of supplies that will be imported during each stage of the study. The letter should include the IP or placebo (when applicable), pharmaceutical form, presentation, concentration, and number of participants to be enrolled in Mexico. A letter of the stability studies should also be provided to support the IP and the placebo comply with the physical, chemical, and biological parameters which must be complied with throughout its useful life, and to maintain established quality specifications during storage and use.

Record Requirements

As indicated in the MEX-22, the sponsor should:

Maintain records that document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP(s)
Maintain a system for retrieving IPs and documenting this retrieval (e.g., for deficient product recall, reclaim after trial completion, expired product reclaim)
Maintain a system for the disposition of unused IP(s) and for the documentation of this disposition
MEX-22 further states the investigator/institution and/or a pharmacist, or other appropriate individual who is designated by the investigator/institution, should maintain records of the IP's delivery to the trial site, the inventory at the site, the use by each participant, and the return to the sponsor or alternative disposition of unused product(s). These records should include dates, quantities, batch/serial numbers, expiration dates (if applicable), and the unique code numbers assigned to the IP(s) and trial participants. Investigators should maintain records that document adequately that the participants were provided the doses specified by the protocol and reconcile all IP(s) received from the sponsor.

Per NOM-059-SSA1-2015, the sponsor is also responsible for storing files related to the manufacture and control of the IP for at least five (5) years after product registration has been granted. Additionally, the sponsor must ensure that this documentation is safeguarded, and that the files are stored at the sponsor’s facilities or in specific facilities contracted for this purpose.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
In Mexico, a specimen is referred to as a “product of human beings.” According to GenHlthLaw and Reg-HumSpecDisp, products of human beings include any tissues or substances, excreted or expelled by the human body as a result of normal physiological processes.

GenHlthLaw and Reg-HumSpecDisp also provide more specific definitions for specimens including germ cells, stem cells, blood and derivatives, plasma, tissue, cellular concentrates, and organs. Please refer to these sources for more detailed information.

Additionally, G-RECs-Op-2018 states that human biological material includes organs, tissues, tissue components, cells, and products and cadavers of human beings.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
Import

As delineated in GenHlthLaw, Reg-COFEPRIS, and Reg-HumSpecDisp, the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Comisión Federal para la Protección contra Riesgos Sanitarios (COFEPRIS)) is responsible for authorizing the import of specimens (referred to as “products of human beings” in Mexico).

According to G-ImprtPermit, institutions that import products of human beings including tissues, cells, blood and its components or derivatives intended for research, diagnosis, teaching, or treatment for therapeutic purposes, must comply with specific COFEPRIS documentation submission requirements to apply for an import permit. The documentation required to obtain an import permit specifically for research purposes is as follows:

Import or Export of Products of Human Beings form (original) (see MEX-24)
Proof of payment of fees (one (1) original; G-ImprtPermit also specifies that in terms of the Federal Rights Law, proof of payment of fees is applicable only to the application for a permit for the hospitalization of blood units, their components, and hematopoietic progenitor cells)
Document certifying the operation of the foreign establishment issued by the health authority of the country of origin (original)
Health license for the corresponding line of business (original)
Notice of operation for the corresponding line of business (original)
Authorization document issued by COFEPRIS for the protocol when it is intended for humans, or a summary of the study when in vitro is being carried out, where appropriate (original)
Letter of acceptance in which the establishment that will receive the samples, justifying the reason and use of the samples (original)
Letter of transmission justifying the use and purpose of sending the samples (original)
Report on the date and procedure of destruction, if applicable (original)
Document certifying the operation of the establishment that supplies human blood, its components and derivatives, issued by the health authority of the country of origin (original)
Health license with the corresponding line of business (related to blood, its components or derivatives) (original)
Power of attorney (accreditation of the legal representative)
G-ImprtPermit further notes that COFEPRIS has 45 business days to respond to the import request, and 15 business day to notify the applicant of missing or additional information required in a prevention letter. The applicant, in turn, has five (5) business days to respond to COFEPRIS’s prevention letter. The import permit approval is valid for 180 business days. Refer to G-ImprtPermit for detailed information necessary to obtain import permits for teaching, diagnosis, and therapeutic purposes including the use of human blood (i.e., umbilical cord blood or hematopoietic progenitor cells) and corneas.

D-CargoTransprt bars exclusive cargo shipments to the Mexico City International Airport (AICM). See D-CargoTransprt and D-ModCargoTransprt for more details regarding the relocation of cargo shipments to other airports in Mexico.

Export

According to G-ExprtPermit, institutions that dispose of or export products of human beings including tissues, cells, blood and its components or derivatives that are intended for diagnosis, treatment, research, or teaching purposes must also submit documentation to COFEPRIS to apply for an export permit.

G-ExprtPermit indicates the following general documentation must be provided to export cells, tissues, and products of human beings and their components:

Import or Export of Products of Human Beings form (see MEX-24)
Proof of payment of fees (original and two (2) legible copies) (applicable only to requests for an export permit for units of blood, its components, and hematopoietic progenitor cells)
Document issued by the health authority of the destination country that certifies the operation of the establishment (original)
Letter of acceptance of the establishment abroad (original)
Authorization letter issued by COFEPRIS for the protocol when it is intended for humans, or a summary of the study when in vitro is being carried out, if applicable (original)
Notice of operation of health establishment (original)
Health license (original) (for cells, tissues, human products, and their components)
Power of attorney (original)
G-ExprtPermit further notes that COFEPRIS has 45 business days to respond to the export request, and 15 business days to notify the applicant of missing or additional information required in a prevention letter. The applicant, in turn, has five (5) business days to respond to COFEPRIS’s prevention letter. The permit approval is valid for 180 business days.

In addition, G-ExprtPermit outlines the following required documentation to be submitted to COFEPRIS to export umbilical cord blood or hematopoietic progenitor cells, for cryopreservation, research, or therapeutic purposes:

Import or Export of Products of Human Beings form (original) (see MEX-24)
Proof of payment of fees (one (1) original and two (2) legible copies; G-ExprtPermit also specifies that in terms of the Federal Rights Law, proof of payment of fees is applicable only to the application for a permit for the hospitalization of blood units, their components and hematopoietic progenitor cells)
Letter of acceptance of the establishment abroad (original)
Health license (original)
Document issued by the health authority of the destination country that certifies the operation of the establishment (original)
Power of attorney (original)
Import/Export Permit Submission Procedures

MEX-24 indicates that an applicant may submit a request to obtain a permit to import or export specimens in print, in person via COFEPRIS’s Comprehensive Service Center (Centro Integral de Servicios (CIS)) (MEX-37), or electronically via the Mexican Digital Window for Foreign Trade (Ventanilla Única de Comercio Exterior Mexicano (VUCEM)) (MEX-114). Per G-ImprtPermit and G-ExprtPermit, the application should be submitted electronically via MEX-114 (Refer to MEX-114 for submission instructions). G-ImprtPermit and G-ExprtPermit state that to submit an application online, it is necessary to obtain an e.signature (also known as e.firma). An e.signature can be obtained from the Tax Administration Service (Servicio de Administración Tributaria (SAT)) as described in MEX-83.

See MEX-116 for instructions on completing MEX-24. See also G-ImprtPermitMod for the required documentation and submission procedures to modify an import/export permit for products of human beings including tissues, cells, and blood and its components or derivatives.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 31, 2025
In accordance with GenHlthLaw, Reg-HumSpecDisp, and G-RECs-Op-2018, prior to collecting, storing, or using a research participant’s human biological material, consent must be obtained from the participant or the legal representative. GenHlthLaw specifically states that the consent must be obtained in writing.

From an ethical perspective, G-RECs-Op-2018 indicates it is important to consider including the following aspects in the informed consent for human biological materials use and storage:

The document should clarify that samples may not be used for any purpose other than the one initially requested, and in accordance with the protocol approved by the Research Ethics Committee (REC) (Comité de Ética en Investigación (CEI))
The collection, use, and storage of biological material must guarantee the confidentiality and privacy of the donor
The commercialization of biological material is prohibited
The investigator may not exercise undue influence by offering financial compensation to the donors of biological material
The collection and transfer of biological material should not, under any circumstances, put at risk the medical care and safety of the research participant
When the informed consent is revoked, the biological material collected for such purposes must no longer be used, unless the materials are irreversibly dissociated from the person. Data and biological material that are not irreversibly dissociated should be treated according to the wishes of the owner or donor in accordance with the International Declaration on Human Genetic Data (MEX-34)
The REC (CEI) should demand to establish time limits for the use of biological material and prohibit the unrestricted use of the material
GenHlthLaw and Reg-HumSpecDisp provide additional consent requirements for the donor and the legal representatives (referred to as secondary donors in Mexico).

According to GenHlthLaw, persons may choose to donate their organs, tissues, cells, and body by tacit or expressed consent. Expressed consent may be in writing and broadly cover the donation of a person’s body, or it may be limited to certain body parts. The consent may also note that the donation is being made to a specific institution(s)/person(s) as well as the manner, place, time, and any other conditions. Further, the donor’s legal representative may also grant the earlier described consent in writing on the donor’s behalf when the donor cannot do so.

While third parties may not revoke the donor’s expressed consent, per GenHlthLaw, the donor may revoke consent at any time, without any liability. Written consent is specifically required when the donor is living for the following:

The donation of organs and tissues
The donation of blood, blood components, and stem cells
Reg-HumSpecDisp also notes that the donor may, at any time, revoke consent, without liability. Furthermore, if the original donor has not revoked consent during life, the donor’s legal representative revocation of consent will not be valid. Refer to Reg-HumSpecDisp for additional information on preferences for selecting the donor’s legal representatives.

In addition, per GenHlthLaw, the following restrictions apply with regard to consent by the individuals indicated below:

Tacit or consent granted by minors or by persons unable to express their consent freely for any reason will not be valid
All pregnant women are systematically asked for their consent to donate placental blood obtained from stem/progenitor cells for therapeutic or research purposes. However, expressed consent by a pregnant woman will only be admissible if the recipient is in danger of dying, provided that it does not endanger the woman or the fetus
(See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent).

GenHlthLaw also provides requirements to safeguard the confidentiality of a participant’s genetic data. A participant or their legal representative must provide their expressed consent and be informed of the results of their genetic exam and tests. Moreover, any scientific research, innovation, technological development and applications should be oriented to protect human health and respect the freedom and dignity of the participant(s).

Requirements
(Legislation) Federal Law on the Protection of Personal Data Held by Private Parties (PDP-PrivateLaw - Spanish) (English-PDP-PrivateLaw – Google Translation) (Effective March 21, 2025)
Congress of the United Mexican States
(Legislation) General Health Law (GenHlthLaw - Spanish) (Amended through June 7, 2024)
Congress of the United Mexican States
(Legislation) General Law on the Protection of Personal Data Held by Obligated Subjects (PDP-Public - Spanish) (English-PDP-Public – Google Translation) (Effective March 21, 2025)
Congress of the United Mexican States
(Legislation) General Law on the Rights of Girls, Boys and Adolescents (GenChldRtsLaw - Spanish) (English-GenChldRtsLaw – Google Translation) (Amended through May 27, 2024)
Congress of the United Mexican States
(Legislation) General Law on Transparency and Access to Public Information (PDP-Trnspcy - Spanish) (English-PDP-Trnspcy – Google Translation) (Effective March 21, 2025)
Congress of the United Mexican States
(Legislation) Political Constitution of the United Mexican States (MexConstitution - Spanish) (Amended through October 15, 2025)
Congress of the United Mexican States
(Regulation) Agreement Amending the Various Provisions by which the General Provisions for the Integration and Operation of Research Ethics Committees are Issued and the Hospital Units that Must Have Them in Accordance with the National Bioethics Commission Criteria, Published on October 31, 2012 (REC-Op-Amd - Spanish) (Effective December 11, 2020)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Agreement by which the Administrative Units and Decentralized Bodies of the Ministry of Health are Organized (MOH-Org - Spanish) (Effective March 28, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Agreement by which the General Provisions for the Integration and Operation of Research Ethics Committees are Issued and the Hospital Units That Must Have Them are Established in Accordance with the National Bioethics Commission Criteria (REC-Op - Spanish) (Effective November 1, 2012)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Agreement Establishing Simplification Actions for (Research Protocol Authorization) Procedures Carried Out Before the Federal Commission for the Protection against Health Risks, as Indicated Therein (Agrmnt_ResProtProcs - Spanish) (Effective May 19, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Agreement Establishing the Criteria for the Authorization of Research Protocols in Human Beings that have Prior Authorization from a Foreign Regulatory Authority (Agrmnt_FRAAuth - Spanish) (Effective June 17, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Agreement Issuing the Guidelines for the Presentation of Documents that Guarantee Good Manufacturing Practices for Drugs, Medicines and Medical Devices that Accompany Applications for New Health Registrations, their Extensions and Modifications (Agrmnt_GMPCert – Spanish) (Effective March 21, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Agreement on Reforms and Additions to the General Provisions for the Integration and Operation of Research Ethics Committees and the Hospital Units That Must Have Them are Established in Accordance with the National Bioethics Commission Criteria, Published on October 31, 2012 (REC-Op-Ref - Spanish) (Effective January 12, 2016)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Agreement on Supplies and Importation with Authorized Regulatory Authorities [Abridged title] (Agrmnt_RegHlthSup - Spanish) (Effective September 2, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Regulation of Health Products (Reg-HlthProd - Spanish) (English-Reg-HlthProd – Google Translation) (Last Updated May 31, 2021)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Regulation of the Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (Reg-COFEPRIS - Spanish) (Effective April 14, 2004)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Regulation of the General Health Law in Health Research (HlthResRegs - Spanish) (English-HlthResRegs - Google Translation) (Effective April 3, 2014)
Congress of the United Mexican States
(Regulation) Regulations of the General Health Law Regarding Sanitary Control of the Disposition of Human Organs, Tissues and Cadavers (Reg-HumSpecDisp - Spanish) (English-Reg-HumSpecDisp – Google Translation) (Last Updated March 26, 2014)
Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Application for Committee Modality C. Biosafety Committee (COFEPRIS-05-038-C) (G-BiosafetyReg - Spanish) (Last Updated June 12, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Application for Modification to the Permit to Import into the National Territory or the Export Permit for Cells and Tissues Including Blood, its Components and Derivatives, as well as Other Human Products (COFEPRIS-01-030) (G-ImprtPermitMod - Spanish) (Last Updated July 17, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Application for Registration of a Research Ethics Committee – Modality A) Initial Registration (CONBIOETICA-00-003-A) (G-RECReg - Spanish) (Last Updated March 14, 2025)
National Bioethics Commission (CONBIOÉTICA), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Application for Registration of Committee - Modality B) Research Committee (COFEPRIS-05-038-B) (G-ResCommReg - Spanish) (Last Updated June 12, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS)
(Guidance) Application for Registration of Hospital Bioethics Committee - New Registration (CONBIOETICA-00-001) (G-CHBReg - Spanish) (Last Updated April 16, 2025)
National Bioethics Commission (CONBIOÉTICA), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Application for Renewal of Registration of the Research Ethics Committee – Modality B) Renewal (CONBIOETICA-00-003-B) (G-RECRegRenew - Spanish) (Last Updated March 17, 2025)
National Bioethics Commission (CONBIOÉTICA), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) DIGIPRiS Online Regulation: Frequently Asked Questions (G-DIGIPRiS-FAQs - Spanish) (English-G-DIGIPRiS-FAQs – Google Translation) (Last Updated May 15, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) DIGIPRiS Online Regulation: Comparison of Documents (G-DIGIPRiS-DocComp - Spanish) (English-G-DIGIPRiS-DocComp – Google Translation) (July 30, 2024)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) DIGIPRiS User Manual: DIGIPRiS Registration (G-DIGIPRiS-Regis - Spanish) (English-G-DIGIPRiS-Regis – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) DIGIPRiS User Manual: Platform Access, Profiles and Roles (G-DIGIPRiS-SystAccess - Spanish) (English-G-DIGIPRiS-SystAccess – Google Translation) (May 19, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) DIGIPRiS User Manual: Submission of New Protocols (COFEPRIS Key Code-04-010) and Amendments (COFEPRIS Key Code-09-012) (G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts - Spanish) (English-G-DIGIPRiS-Prots&Amdts - Google Translation) (May 19, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Guide for Requesting Human Research Protocols (COFEPRIS 04-010) on the “DIGIPRiS: Research and Clinical Trials” Platform (G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts - Spanish) (English-G-DIGIPRiS-ResProts – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Guide for Requesting the Pharmacovigilance Report (G-PharmRptReq - Spanish) (English-G-PharmRptReq – Google Translation) (Revision 02) (March 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice in Health Research (COFEPRIS-GCP - Spanish) (English-COFEPRIS-GCP – Google Translation) (Effective June 1, 2012)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Guidelines for Serving the Public at the Comprehensive Service Center of the Federal Commission for Protection Against Sanitary Risks (G-CIS - Spanish) (Effective December 15, 2021)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Health Permit for the Importation of Medicines that are not or do not Contain Narcotics or Psychotropic Substances, and that are not Registered (COFEPRIS 01-010-A) (G-UnregDrugImprts - Spanish) (Last Updated July 15, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Modification to the Guidelines for Serving the Public Users of the Comprehensive Service Center of the Federal Commission for Protection Against Health Risks Published on December 14, 2021 (G-CISMod - Spanish) (Effective September 27, 2022)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) National Guide for Integration and Operation of the Research Ethics Committees (G-RECs-Op-2018 - Spanish) (English-G-RECs-Op-2018 - Google Translation) (6th Edition) (2018)
National Bioethics Commission, Ministry of Health
(Guidance) National Guide for the Integration and Operation of Hospital Bioethics Committees (G-CHBs-Op - Spanish) (English-G-CHBs-Op – Google Translation) (5th Edition) (2015)
National Bioethics Commission, Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Notice of Suspected Adverse Drug Reactions (COFEPRIS-04-017) (G-ADR-PatientRpt - Spanish) (Last Updated August 6, 2024)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Permission to Export Cells and Tissues from the National Territory including Blood, its Components and Derivatives, as well as Other Products of Human Beings (COFEPRIS 01-024) (G-ExprtPermit - Spanish) (Last Updated July 15, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Permission to Import Cells and Tissues into the National Territory, including Blood, its Components and Derivatives, as well as Other Products of Human Beings (COFEPRIS 01-025) (G-ImprtPermit - Spanish) (Last Updated July 16, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Pharmacovigilance Guide for Clinical Research (G-ClinResPV - Spanish) (English-G-ClinResPV – Google Translation) (March 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Pharmacovigilance Guide for Preparing the Periodic Safety Report (G-PharmPerSafRpt - Spanish) (English-G-PharmPerSafRpt – Google Translation) (Revision 02) (March 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Pharmacovigilance Guide for Reporting Safety Notifications or any Safety Problem Related to the Use of Medicines and Vaccines (G-AENotif - Spanish) (English-G-AENotif – Google Translation) (Revision 02) (March 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Request for Authorization of Research Protocols in Human Beings Modality A (Medicines, Biologics, and Biotechnologies); Modality B (Medicines (Bioequivalence Studies)); Modality C (New Resources, Except for Pharmacological Ones); Modality D (Risk-Free Research (Observational Studies)) (G-HumResProt - Spanish) (Last Updated June 18, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Request for Modification or Amendment to the Research Protocol Authorization (COFEPRIS-09-012) (G-ResProtocolAmd - Spanish) (Last Updated March 5, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Decree) Decree Amending the Various Provisions of the Decree Creating the Decentralized Body Called the National Bioethics Commission, Published on September 7, 2005 (D-CONBIOETICA - Spanish) (Effective February 17, 2017)
Ministry of Health
(Decree) Decree Establishing the Closure of the Mexico City Benito Juárez International Airport, for the Operations of the Indicated Air Transportation Public Service (D-CargoTransprt - Spanish) (Effective February 3, 2023)
President of the Mexican United States
(Decree) Decree Modifying the Various Provisions that Establish the Closure of the Mexico City Benito Juárez International Airport, for the Operations of the Indicated Air Transportation Public, Published on February 2, 2023 (D-ModCargoTransprt - Spanish) (Effective July 7, 2023)
President of the Mexican United States
(Standard) Annexes to the Official Mexican Standard NOM-059-SSA1-2015, Good Drug Manufacturing Practices (NOM-059-SSA1-2015-Annexes - Spanish) (English-NOM-059-SSA1-2015-Annexes – Google Translation) (January 11, 2017)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Standard) Mexican Official Standard NOM-012-SSA3-2012, which Establishes the Criteria for the Execution of Health Research Projects in Human Beings (NOM-012-SSA3-2012 - Spanish) (Effective March 5, 2013)
Ministry of Health
(Standard) Mexican Official Standard NOM-027-SSA3-2013, Regulation of Health Services, which Establishes the Criteria for the Operation and Care in the Emergency Services of Health Care Facilities (NOM-027-SSA3-2013 - Spanish) (Effective November 28, 2013)
Ministry of Health
(Standard) Mexican Official Standard NOM-059-SSA1-2015, Good Medicines Manufacturing Practices (NOM-059-SSA1-2015 - Spanish) (Effective August 3, 2016)
Ministry of Health
(Standard) Mexican Official Standard NOM-073-SSA1-2015, Stability of Drugs and Medicines, as well as Herbal Remedies (NOM-073-SSA1-2015 - Spanish) (Effective December 4, 2016)
Ministry of Health
(Standard) Mexican Official Standard NOM-164-SSA1-2015, Good Drug Manufacturing Practices (NOM-164-SSA1-2015 - Spanish) (Effective August 2, 2016)
Ministry of Health
(Standard) Mexican Official Standard NOM-176-SSA1-1998, Health Requirements for Manufacturers, Distributors and Suppliers of Drugs Used in the Manufacture of Medicinal Products for Human Use (NOM-176-SSA1-1998 - Spanish) (English-NOM-176-SSA1-1998 – Google Translation) (Effective January 16, 2002)
Ministry of Health
(Standard) Mexican Official Standard NOM-177-SSA1-2013, which Establishes the Tests and Procedures to Demonstrate that a Drug is Interchangeable (NOM-177-SSA1-2013 - Spanish) (Effective November 19, 2013)
Ministry of Health
(Standard) Mexican Official Standard NOM-220-SSA1-2016, Pharmacovigilance Installation and Operation (NOM-220-SSA1-2016 - Spanish) (Effective January 15, 2018)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Standard) Mexican Official Standard NOM-257-SSA1-2014, Regarding Biotechnological Medicines (NOM-257-SSA1-2014 - Spanish) (Effective February 9, 2015)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Standard) Mexican Official Standard NOM-004-SSA3-2012, of the Clinical Record (NOM-004-SSA3-2012 - Spanish) (Effective December 14, 2012)
Ministry of Health
(Standard) Modification of the Mexican Official Standard NOM-177-SSA1-2013, which Establishes the Tests and Procedures to Demonstrate that a Drug is Interchangeable (NOM-177-SSA1-2013-Mod - Spanish) (Effective September 16, 2023)
Ministry of Health
(Standard) MODIFICATION of Various Points of the Mexican Official Standard NOM-059-SSA1-2015, Good Manufacturing Practices for Medicines, Published on February 5, 2016 (NOM-059-SSA1-2015-Mod – Spanish) (Effective December 3, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Standard) Modification to the Mexican Official Standard NOM-220-SSA1-2016, Pharmacovigilance Installation and Operation (NOM-220-SSA1-2016-Mod - Spanish) (Effective October 1, 2020)
Ministry of Health
Additional Resources
(Article) Mexico: From 2010 to 2025 – Evolution of the New Federal Law on the Protection of Personal Data held by Private Parties (MEX-95) (March 26, 2025)
Baker McKenzie
(Article) Simplified Procedures for Health Regulations: COFEPRIS Transforms More than 30 Procedures (MEX-87 - Spanish) (English-MEX-87 – Official Translation) (July 14, 2025)
Arochi & Lindner
(Document) Applicable Rates for Health Records, Health Licenses, Import Permits, Foreign Trade Export Procedures, and Other Permits or Authorizations - January 1 to December 31, 2025 (MEX-11 - Spanish) (English-MEX-11 – Google Translation) (December 30, 2024)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Document) Data Protection Laws and Regulations Mexico 2025 (MEX-4) (July 21, 2025)
Diaz, Abraham; Alcocer, Giustavo; and Huitron, Carla; Olivares
(Document) e-Reporting Industry User Manual (MEX-117 - Spanish) (English-MEX-117 - Google Translation) (Version 2.0) (February 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Document) e-Reporting Instructions for Health Professionals and Patients/Consumers - Notification of Adverse Drug Reactions (MEX-12 - Spanish) (English-MEX-12 – Google Translation) (October 2021)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Document) Enabled Pre-Assessment Support Unit - General Notification Procedure (MEX-21 - Spanish) (English-MEX-21 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Coordinating Commission of National Institutes of Health and High Specialty Hospitals (CCINSHAE), Ministry of Health
(Document) Enabled Pre-Assessment Support Unit (UHAP - CCINSHAE) - Frequently Asked Questions (MEX-10 - Spanish) (English-MEX-10 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Coordinating Commission of National Institutes of Health and High Specialty Hospitals (CCINSHAE), Ministry of Health
(Document) Evaluation Document for the Request for Authorization of Research Protocols in Human Beings, COFEPRIS-04-010 Modalities A, C, and D (MEX-84 - Spanish) (English-MEX-84 – Google Translation) (Version 1.1) (July 30, 2024)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Document) General Information for Submitting UHAP-CCINSHAE Documentation (MEX-19 - Spanish) (English-MEX-19 – Google Translation) (2019)
Enabled Pre-Assessment Support Unit (UHAP), Coordinating Commission of National Institutes of Health and High Specialty Hospitals (CCINSHAE), Ministry of Health
(Document) Health Verification Certificate for Establishments Conducting Clinical Trials (MEX-93 - Spanish) (Revision 07) (Last Updated March 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Document) Instructions for Filling Out the Authorizations, Certificates and Visits Form (MEX-18 - Spanish) (English-MEX-18 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Document) Instructions for Filling Out the Committee Registration Application Form (MEX-102 – Spanish) (English-MEX-102 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Document) Instructions for Filling out the Form for the Import or Export of Human Products (MEX-116 - Spanish) (English-MEX-116 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Document) List of Enabled Pre-Assessment Support Units - UHAP (MEX-9 - Spanish) (English-MEX-9 – Google Translation) (July 27, 2018)
Sanitary Authorization Commission, Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (MEX-5) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) Regulatory System Strengthening in the Americas: Lessons Learned from the National Regulatory Authorities of Regional Reference (MEX-110) (2022)
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), World Health Organization
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (MEX-76) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) E2B(R3) Individual Case Safety Report (ICSR) Specification and Related Files (MEX-101) (Last Updated July 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1) (MEX-32) (Step 4 Version) (June 10, 1996)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Guideline E2B (R3) on Electronic Transmission of Individual Case Safety Reports (ICSRs) – Data Elements and Message Specification – Implementation Guide (MEX-79) (Step 5 Version) (July 2013)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (MEX-80) (Step 5 Version) (October 27, 1994)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Good Manufacturing Practice Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (Q7) (MEX-81) (Step 5 Version) (November 10, 2000)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Pharmacovigilance Planning (E2E) (MEX-82) (Step 5 Version) (November 18, 2004)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (MEX-22) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) International Declaration on Human Genetic Data (MEX-34) (October 16, 2003)
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(Press Release) Press Release 105/2023 - Cofepris Transforms Regulatory Policy: Agility in the Registration of Generic and Biosimilar Drugs (MEX-120 - Spanish) (September 28, 2023)
Federal Commission for the Protection against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Press Release) COFEPRIS Strengthens Regulation of Clinical Trials with the Issuance of 16 ICH Efficacy Guidelines (MEX-85 - Spanish) (September 24, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection against Health Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Advanced Electronic Signature (e.firma) (MEX-83 - Spanish) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
Tax Administration Service (SAT)
(Webpage) Adverse Reaction Reporting via VigiFlow by State Centers, Institutional Coordinating Centers, Institutional Centers, and Pharmacovigilance Units of the National Health System (MEX-77 - Spanish) (August 20, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Adverse Reaction Reporting via VIGIRAM by Patients/Consumers/Healthcare Professionals (MEX-78 - Spanish) (August 21, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Certification of Good Manufacturing Practices (MEX-36 - Spanish) (November 5, 2021)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Clinical Trials (MEX-88 - Spanish) (September 29, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) COFEPRIS - Home Page (MEX-71 - Spanish) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Comprehensive Service Center (CIS) (MEX-37 - Spanish) (May 19, 2025)
Comprehensive Service Center, Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Country Profile: Mexico (MEX-35) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) DIGIPRiS Manuals: Self-Managed Procedures (MEX-106 - Spanish) (August 25, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) DIGIPRiS Research and Clinical Trials (MEX-104 - Spanish) (December 1, 2023)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) DIGIPRiS: Online Regulation (MEX-86 - Spanish) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Enabled Pre-Assessment Support Unit (UHAP) (MEX-69 - Spanish) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS)
(Webpage) Health Verification Instruments. Health Verification Reports (MEX-92 - Spanish) (October 10, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Hospital Bioethics Committee (MEX-56 - Spanish) (October 27, 2025)
National Bioethics Commission (CONBIOÉTICA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) ICH Guideline Implementation (MEX-2) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) ICH Members & Observers (MEX-41) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) List of PIC/S Participating Authorities - Mexico (MEX-111) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S)
(Webpage) Mexican Foreign Trade Single Window (VUCEM) (MEX-114 - Spanish) (Current as of November 5, 2025)
General Customs Administration
(Webpage) Monitoring of Research Ethics Committees (MEX-72 - Spanish) (Last Updated October 11, 2023)
National Bioethics Commission (CONBIOÉTICA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) National Bioethics Commission - What Do We Do? (MEX-55 - Spanish) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
National Bioethics Commission (CONBIOÉTICA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) National Registry of Clinical Trials (RNEC) (MEX-68 - Spanish) (v2.0) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Pharmacovigilance Guides, Guidelines and Requirements (MEX-54 - Spanish) (August 21, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Procedure for Renewing Research Ethics Committees (RECs) (MEX-100 – Spanish) (September 9, 2024)
National Bioethics Commission (CONBIOÉTICA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Registration Procedure for Hospital Bioethics Committees (CHB) (MEX-59 - Spanish) (October 27, 2025)
National Bioethics Commission (CONBIOÉTICA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Registration Procedure for Research Ethics Committees (MEX-58 - Spanish) (September 9, 2024)
National Bioethics Commission (CONBIOÉTICA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Research and Biosafety Committees Registration (MEX-47 - Spanish) (September 28, 2016)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Research Ethics Committees (MEX-57 - Spanish) (October 14, 2025)
National Bioethics Commission (CONBIOÉTICA), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Submitting a "Pre-Assessment Request" to a UANL UHAP (MEX-70 - Spanish) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital, Autonomous University of Nuevo León (UANL)
(Webpage) Terms of Use DIGIPRiS Medicines (MEX-89 - Spanish) (English-MEX-89 – Google Translation) (September 5, 2024)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Testing Laboratories and Interchangeability and Biocomparability Units (Authorized Third Parties) (MEX-98 - Spanish) (September 4, 2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) To the Community that Executes Research Projects for Health in Human Beings: Compliance with NOM-012-SSA3-2012 (MEX-28 - Spanish) (July 30, 2020)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Webpage) UANL Enabled Pre-Assessment Support Unit (UHAP) (MEX-90 - Spanish) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital, Autonomous University of Nuevo León (UANL)
(Webpage) VigiFlow - Product Support (MEX-44) (Last Updated September 2025)
Uppsala Monitoring Centre, World Health Organization
(Webpage) VigiFlow Login (MEX-43) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
Uppsala Monitoring Centre, World Health Organization
(Webpage) VigiRam (MEX-118 - Spanish) (Current as of October 31, 2025)
Uppsala Monitoring Centre, World Health Organization
Forms
(Form) Application for Committee Registration (FF-COFEPRIS-09) (MEX-26 - Spanish) (English-MEX-26 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Form) Application for Research Ethics Committee Registration (MEX-29 - Spanish) (English-MEX-29 - Google Translation) (2020)
National Bioethics Commission (CONBIOÉTICA), Ministry of Health
(Form) Authorizations, Certificates and Visits (FF-COFEPRIS-01) (MEX-25 - Spanish) (English-MEX-25 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Form) Example of Installation Record of the Research Ethics Committee (MEX-27 - Spanish) (English-MEX-27 – Google Translation) (2024)
National Bioethics Commission (CONBIOÉTICA), Ministry of Health
(Form) Guide for the Presentation of Information in Final Technical-Descriptive Reports (MEX-94 - Spanish) (English-MEX-94 – Google Translation) (Revision 01) (2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Form) Guide for the Presentation of Information in Partial Technical-Descriptive Reports (MEX-31 - Spanish) (English-MEX-31 – Google Translation) (Revision 00) (2025)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Form) Import or Export of Human Products (FF-COFEPRIS-04) (MEX-24 - Spanish) (English-MEX-24 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Federal Commission for Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
(Form) Notice of Suspected Adverse Drug Reactions (FF-COFEPRIS-11) (MEX-30 - Spanish) (English-MEX-30 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Federal Commission for the Protection Against Sanitary Risks (COFEPRIS), Ministry of Health
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Peru
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
This message was reviewed on December 29, 2025
REPEC Website

The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe) and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible outside of Peru.

Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

National Institute of Health (INS)

As per Decree021-2017, Res006-2023, and the G-CTInspec, Peru’s INS is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial approvals, oversight, and inspections. The INS, through the Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)) (formerly known as the General Office for Research and Technology Transfer (Oficina General de Investigación y Transferencia Tecnológica (OGITT))), grants permission for clinical trials to be conducted in Peru in accordance with Decree021-2017, Res184-2023, Decree028-2023 (amending Decree021-2017), Res006-2023, the INS-CTManual, and Res252-2022 (amending the INS-CTManual).

As indicated in Law27657 and Decree001-2003, the INS, a decentralized public executive agency within the Ministry of Health of Peru (Ministerio de Salud del Perú (MINSA)), was granted authority to approve clinical trials by the MINSA in 2003. Decree021-2017, Res006-2023, and the INS-CTManual explain that the DIIS carries out the INS’s mandate to authorize and supervise the conduct of clinical trials in the country to ensure the quality and integrity of the data or other elements related to the trial; to protect the rights and well-being of research participants; to ensure the safety of the investigational products (IPs) used in the trials; and to establish procedures within the framework of Decree021-2017, Res184-2023, Decree028-2023, the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (PER-53), and other applicable national and international standards and regulations. Additionally, per Res006-2023, PER-20, and PER-55, the DIIS is also responsible for regulating, promoting, developing, and disseminating research, innovation, and technology transfer; proposing policies related to regulating and standardizing clinical trials; providing technical assistance for clinical trial development; and issuing binding technical opinions and answering queries related to the promotion, management, and dissemination of health research and innovation as well as clinical trials (see PER-55 for additional DIIS responsibilities).

Res006-2023 and PER-56 further explain that the Clinical Trials Subdirectorate (Subdirección de Ensayos Clínicos) (formerly known as the Executive Office of Investigation (Oficina Ejecutiva de Investigación (OEI))), operates under the DIIS, and is responsible for formulating policies, strategies, and regulations as well as authorizing and supervising clinical trials. According to Decree001-2003, the DIIS, through the Clinical Trials Subdirectorate, also implements the INS’s objectives to promote, develop, disseminate, and manage scientific and technological research; establish administrative and technical procedures related to biomedical research; propose health research and technology transfer policies and guidelines; and provide health services to the Peruvian population. According to PER-68, the DIIS’s Health Research Subdirectorate (Subdirección de Investigación en Salud) is responsible for organizing and maintaining REPEC (PER-89) (also referred to as REPECv2), the national registration system for clinical trials, institutional ethics committees (ECs) (los Comités Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEIs)), research centers, and contract research organizations (CROs). See also PER-120 for frequently asked questions about REPEC. Refer to the Scope of Assessment, Submission Process, and Initiation, Agreements & Registration sections for additional information on PER-89.

National Authority for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Medical Products (ANM)

As stated in Decree016-2011 and PER-119, the National Authority for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Medical Products (la Autoridad Nacional de Productos Farmacéuticos, Dispositivos Médicos y Productos Sanitarios (ANM)) is the line agency of MINSA, serving as the national technical and regulatory authority of pharmaceutical products, medical devices, and healthcare products for human use as established by Law29459. Per Law29459 and PER-119, the ANM is responsible for proposing regulations and standards, and for evaluating, implementing, controlling, inspecting, supervising, monitoring, auditing, certifying, and accrediting matters related to the provisions of Law29459, among other functions.

As delineated in Decree021-2017, the ANM is responsible for issuing binding technical opinions on the safety and quality of IPs according to the stage and type of research; evaluating research protocols for bioequivalence studies to demonstrate interchangeability as part of the requirement for health registration in the country; authorizing, exclusively for research purposes, the import or manufacture of IPs and complementary products through a registration process and certificate (i.e., health registration); and authorizing the use of an IP under post-study access conditions. Pursuant to Law29459 and Decree016-2011, the ANM also provisionally authorizes the importation, manufacture, and use of pharmaceutical products, medical devices, and health products without granting health registration in the following cases:

For use in emergency or declared emergency situations
For individual prevention and treatment, with due medical justification
In public health situations in which the need for the product is demonstrated and the product is not available on the national market
Exclusively for research involving human beings
Per Law29459 and Decree016-2011, the ANM’s other responsibilities center on risk prevention and pharmacovigilance and technovigilance activities associated with pharmaceutical products, medical devices, and health products, as well as regulating, developing, promoting, monitoring, supervising, and evaluating the Peruvian Pharmacovigilance and Technovigilance System (Sistema Peruano de Farmacovigilancia y Tecnovigilancia). (Note: The ANM is also referred to as the General Directorate of Medicines, Supplies and Drugs (La Dirección General de Medicamentos Insumos y Drogas (DIGEMID)) (PER-109)).

Other Considerations

Please note: Peru is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (PER-11), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see PER-57.

Contact Information

National Institute of Health (INS)

According to PER-63, the INS contact information is as follows:

Instituto Nacional de Salud
Sede Central
Jirón Cápac Yupanqui 1400 - Jesus Maria - Lima - Lima - Perú
Phone: (01) 748 1111
Email: comunicaciones@ins.gob.pe

According to PER-13, the DIIS contact information is as follows:

Instituto Nacional de Salud
Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud 
Sede Chorrillos
Av. Defensores del Morro 2268 (Ex Huaylas) - Chorrillos
Lima 9
Perú

National Authority for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Medical Products (ANM)

PER-109 indicates the ANM’s contact information is as follows:

DIGEMID
Av. Parque de las Leyendas 240
San Miguel
Perú

Phone: 1-631-4300 Extension: 6700, 6705, and 6501
Email: atenciontramite@minsa.gob.pe

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Overview

In accordance with the provisions delineated in Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, and Res252-2022 (amending the INS-CTManual), Peru’s INS is responsible for reviewing and approving clinical trial applications using registered or unregistered investigational drug products. As per Decree021-2017, the scope of the INS’s assessment includes Phases I through IV clinical trials for pharmaceuticals including medicines, herbal medicines and other complementary products, dietetic products and sweeteners, biological products, and compounded (galenic) products. As specified in Decree021-2017, Res655-2019 (amending Decree021-2017), the INS-CTManual, Res252-2022, and PER-61, the INS’s review and approval of a clinical trial application is dependent upon obtaining proof of approval from an accredited ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)). Therefore, the INS and EC reviews may not be conducted in parallel.

Per the INS-CTManual and Res252-2022, EC approval of the research protocol and the informed consent form (ICF) must be submitted as part of the clinical trial application dossier in order for the INS to conduct its review. PER-83 further specifies that the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) must provide a copy of the research protocol and ICF that is stamped and signed by the EC in its entirety as evidence that the approved version is being presented. Refer to the INS-CTManual and Res252-2022 for additional submission information. Per Res0423-2019, the application for clinical trial authorization is in PER-24.

In addition, per Decree021-2017, the sponsor must also ensure authorization by the research institution where the clinical trial will be carried out.

Decree021-2017 states that the IP must meet at least one (1) of the following conditions to be authorized for use in clinical trials in Peru:

Must be approved for use in humans by drug regulatory authorities of countries with high health surveillance
Is produced in Peru, is used in preclinical research, and complies with Ministry of Health of Peru (Ministerio de Salud del Perú (MINSA))’s political and/or research priorities
Will serve to establish pharmaceutical therapeutic equivalence
Is considered a priority for the country’s public health or is within the scope of MINSA policies and/or research priorities
At the request of the National Authority for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Medical Products (la Autoridad Nacional de Productos Farmacéuticos, Dispositivos Médicos y Productos Sanitarios (ANM)), requires a clinical trial to support its efficacy and safety for the health registry
Per Decree016-2011, the following are considered to be countries with high health surveillance: France, Holland, United Kingdom, United States, Canada, Japan, Switzerland, Germany, Spain, Australia, Denmark, Italy, Norway, Belgium, and Sweden.

Clinical Trial Review Process

In accordance with Decree021-2017, Res184-2023, Decree028-2023 (amending Decree021-2017), the INS-CTManual, Res252-2022, and Decree010-2025, the INS’s Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)), is responsible for conducting the review and approval of clinical trial applications. As per Decree021-2017 and Res252-2022, the INS also requests that the ANM assess the safety and quality of the IP to be used in a clinical trial and issue a binding technical opinion as part of the INS’s application review and approval process. Following a review of the research protocol, the ANM technical opinion, and other required documentation included in the application package, the INS will approve the clinical trial. (Note: The ANM is also referred to as the General Directorate of Medicines, Supplies and Drugs (La Dirección General de Medicamentos Insumos y Drogas (DIGEMID)) (PER-109)).

Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, and Res252-2022 also note that the Clinical Trials Subdirectorate (Subdirección de Ensayos Clínicos (SUDEC)) can convene a technical commission of experts when controversial situations arise during the authorization process.

In addition, per Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, and Res252-2022, if the clinical trial is related to an IP for the prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of tuberculosis or HIV/AIDS infection, the specific technical opinion of the MINSA’s General Directorate of Strategic Interventions in Public Health (Dirección General de Intervenciones Estratégicas en Salud Pública (DGIESP)) will be requested to ensure the study does not interfere with its strategic interventions regarding these diseases.

Decree021-2017 and the INS-CTManual state that the DIIS grants clinical trial authorization for the total period of time scheduled for its completion as indicated in the REPEC (PER-89) registration form submission. Further, per Decree021-2017, once the INS has completed the authorization process, the agency will post the approval status of a clinical trial via PER-89. The following application requirements, which align with the World Health Organization’s Trial Registration Data Set (PER-86), will also be provided in the approval status record: study title, sponsor and investigators, IP, condition under study, study design, and number of participants. See PER-111 for additional information on REPEC’s trial data record requirements. Refer to the INS-CTManual and Res252-2022 for details on the DIIS application review process and a flowchart delineating the clinical trial authorization process (see Annex 1).

As explained in the INS-CTManual and Res252-2022, as part of the application evaluation process, the Documentary Processing Area (Área de Trámite Documentario (ATO)) reviews the file to ensure completeness. The applicant has a maximum of two (2) business days to make any corrections that have been identified. If the file is deemed complete and any required corrections have been addressed, the file is assigned a registration number. An identification number is also assigned to the clinical trial in PER-89. Per Res252-2022, the file is then forwarded to the Clinical Trial Processing Area (Área de evaluación de Ensayos Clínicos (AEC)) for review. The list of clinical trial supplies (PER-42), along with the required documentation in Annex 5 of Decree021-2017, is then forwarded to the Research Product Safety Surveillance Area (Área de Vigilancia de la Seguridad del Producto en Investigación (AVISPI)). AVISPI, in turn, sends this documentation to the ANM to request a binding technical opinion on the IP safety and quality. Once the AEC review is completed and the ANM binding technical opinion is received, a report is prepared for the SUDEC Executive Director’s review. If the SUDEC Executive Director approves the report, it is sent to the DIIS, which also reviews and approves the file and signs off on the project. If the file is found to be non-compliant, it is returned to the SUDEC. Otherwise, the sponsor or the CRO is notified of the approval, and the documentation is registered in PER-89. Per Decree021-2017 and Decree010-2025, the sponsor has the right to appeal when the DIIS does not grant authorization. See the Submission Process, Submission Content, and Timeline of Review sections for detailed submission and DIIS timeline requirements.

Per Decree021-2017 and Decree010-2025, any modifications of the conditions under which a clinical trial was authorized, and amendments to the research protocol and/or informed consent, require prior authorization from the DIIS. The following are grounds for modification of clinical trial authorization conditions (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Expansion of the number of research centers
Expansion or modification of the list of supplies to be imported
Change of sponsor or CRO
Change of principal investigator (PI)
Extension of time for conducting the clinical trial
Closure of a research center for a clinical trial
Suspension of clinical trial
Cancellation of clinical trial
Research protocol and/or ICF amendments (e.g., clinical trial title change or new version of protocol report and/or ICF)
Decree028-2023 and Res184-2023 further modify Decree021-2017 to distinguish between amendments and minor changes to the protocol and/or ICF. The updated definition of amendment specifies that an amendment refers to a substantial change(s) that modifies the original version of the protocol and/or ICF and requires INS and EC reauthorization. A minor change(s) is defined as one proposed by the sponsor that complies with Decree028-2023 and the DIIS issued standards delineated in Res184-2023, and the responsibility for executing the protocol remains with the sponsor. Per Decree028-2023, a minor change(s) only requires the approval of the INS registered and accredited EC that originally approved the current version, and the sponsor must communicate the change(s) in writing to the DIIS prior to its implementation. Decree028-2023 and Res184-2023 also note that a minor change does not generate a new version of the protocol or ICF; however, if a subsequent amendment is made to the protocol, it must also contain the minor change(s) made.

Res184-2023 further states that changes or modifications must meet certain criteria to be considered minor changes. For changes that are not considered minor, it is necessary to initiate the corresponding amendment procedure delineated in Decree021-2017. Moreover, any new safety information derived from the Investigator’s Brochure is not considered a minor change. See the Scope of Review section and Res184-2023 for detailed descriptions of minor changes to the protocol and/or ICF that do not require DIIS approval. See the Timeline of Review section for DIIS amendment timeline requirements.

See also the Submission Process section for additional information on trial extension documentation and review requirements.

Inspection

As indicated in Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, and the G-CTInspec, the DIIS inspection team is responsible for overseeing the conduct of clinical trials in Peru at the national level to ensure data quality and integrity or other trial elements, and to protect the rights and well-being of research participants. Inspections may occur any time during the trial at the respective research center, the IP manufacturing site, and/or the sponsor, CRO, EC, or PI facilities. Qualified DIIS personnel carry out inspections in accordance with G-CTInspec requirements and good clinical practice (GCP) standards. Decree021-2017 and the G-CTInspec specify that based on the severity of the inspection findings, the DIIS will apply one (1) or more safety measures, and sanctions, if appropriate, directed at the sponsor, the CRO, the research institution, or the PI before, during, and after the trial is conducted. Decree021-2017 also notes that in the case of violations by foreign sponsors, the INS will inform the authorities of their respective country(ies) so that they can take the appropriate legal action. See also the G-CTFines for additional information on how the DIIS assesses and grades fines.

In addition, refer to Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, and the G-CTInspec for detailed DIIS clinical trial inspection procedures and the application of safety measures, sanctions, and penalties. See PER-100 for the clinical trial inspection sheet form (FOR-DIIS-049). See also the Risk & Quality Management section for sponsor or CRO responsibilities to address inspection violations and/or sanctions.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

National Institute of Health (INS)

Per Decree021-2017, the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for paying a fee, as applicable, to the National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) to submit a clinical trial application for authorization. Additionally, INS payments are required as delineated by Decree010-2025 below.

Request for clinical trial authorization: 3446.50 Peruvian Soles
Request for clinical trial cancellation: 304.80 Peruvian Soles
Authorization to change a clinical trial title: 305.10 Peruvian Soles
Authorization to amend a report: 726.60 Peruvian Soles
Request to expand the number of research centers: 450.60 Peruvian Soles
Request to change the sponsor or contract research organization: 433.40 Peruvian Soles
Request to change the principal investigator: 299.00 Peruvian Soles
Request for a clinical trial extension: 306.40 Peruvian Soles
Request for closure of a research Center: 308.40 Peruvian Soles
Request for Suspension of the clinical trial: 303.00 Peruvian Soles
Request to register a research center: 2524.60 Peruvian Soles
Per Res0423-2019, the forms required to modify the trial may be obtained from PER-26, PER-27, PER-28, PER-43, and PER-31.

As stated in Decree010-2025, the INS may be contacted by phone at (01) 748 1111 ext. 2191 or email at consultaensayos@ins.gob.pe for any additional fee-related questions.

Pursuant to Res655-2019, which amends Decree021-2017, in the case of multicenter clinical trials, the sponsor or the CRO must submit a clinical trial application along with proof of payment information for the processing fee rather than requiring each of the participating research centers in Peru to submit their payment separately, as originally required.

Payment Instructions

As indicated in Decree010-2025, fees must be paid directly to the INS via the following options:

In person at the INS
Via the Virtual Submission Platform (Mesa de Partes Virtual (MPV)) (PER-106)
For questions on submitting a payment electronically via PER-106, send an email to: mesadepartesvirtual@ins.gob.pe. See also PER-105 and G-MPVManual for more information on PER-106 or via the MPV link on the INS webpage.

Decree010-2025 indicates that payments may also be made via electronic transfer. Transfers should be sent to:

Account Name: Banco de la Nación CTA
Account Number: 0000282413
Interbank Account Code: CCI 01800000000028241304

See PER-71 for payment receipt requirements to request authorization of a clinical trial via PER-106. See PER-72 for a list of trial procedures and associated payment receipt requirements, if applicable. Refer to the Submission Process section for additional information on application submission requirements.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Overview

As set forth in Decree021-2017, Res655-2019 (amending Decree021-2017), the INS-CTManual, and Res252-2022 (amending the INS-CTManual), and PER-71, Peru requires clinical trial approval from an institutional ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)) that is accredited by the INS’s National Registry of Accredited Institutional Ethics Committees (PER-61). There are no stated requirements regarding which EC the sponsor should choose to conduct the clinical protocol review. In addition, as noted in Decree021-2017, those research institutions that do not have their own EC may select an INS-accredited EC, preferably located in the same region.

Ethics Committees for Human Subjects Health Research Other than Clinical Trials

Res233-2020, which regulates human subjects research other than clinical trials of drugs or devices, states that health institutions or entities may establish one (1) or more ECs in order to fulfill their requirements to conduct health research with human beings. Per Res233-2020, ECs that conduct health research with humans are created by statute, resolution, or other document that establishes, as a minimum, among others, the committee’s mission, its members, and their respective positions. An EC may be constituted within a public, private, or mixed health institution that provides health services and is registered with the National Registry of Institutions that Provide Health Services (Registro Nacional de Instituciones Prestadoras de Servicios de Salud (RENIPRESS)). An EC may also be an entity within the Ministry of Health of Peru (Ministerio de Salud del Perú (MINSA)), one (1) of the Peruvian universities, or a non-profit legal organization. If the entities or institutions do not have an EC, they may select another INS-registered EC to evaluate their investigations. This arrangement may occur following a written agreement between the authorities of the entities or institutions involved and the respective EC. See the Oversight of Ethics Committees section for information on registering a health service provider institution in RENIPRESS.

Institutional Research Ethics Committee of the National Institute of Health (CIEI-INS)

As described in PER-94, Peru’s Institutional Research Ethics Committee of the National Institute of Health (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación del Instituto Nacional de Salud (CIEI-INS)) is an advisory committee that aims to protect the rights, life, health, privacy, dignity, and well-being of research participant(s) while adhering to the ethical principles accepted by national and international regulations, and the agreements signed by Peru on research ethics. According to PER-77, the CIEI-INS is not accredited to approve clinical trials. It approves research with human participants conducted with the involvement of the INS except for clinical trials with drugs or devices. (See PER-102 for a list of accredited ECs.) See PER-126 for EC registration instructions.

Ethics Committee Composition

As delineated in Decree021-2017, institutional ECs must be multidisciplinary, with the participation of civil society, and be composed of at least five (5) regular members, who must ensure independence in their decision-making process.

Decree021-2017 lists the following membership requirements:

Persons with scientific expertise in the health field, including those with expertise in behavioral or social sciences
Persons with expertise in ethical matters
Persons with expertise in legal matters
Community representatives, whose primary function is to share their views on the communities where research participants are likely to come from
At least one (1) full member must be from the community and not belong to the health field, or to the research institution
In addition, Decree021-2017 specifies that all members must have at least one (1) certificate of basic training in research ethics and one (1) of its members must have training in bioethics. Per Decree021-2017, the EC may consider the assistance of expert consultants on different topics, and the committee must also make the list of all members publicly accessible.

Ethics Committees for Human Subjects Health Research Other than Clinical Trials

As indicated in Res233-2020, ECs are multidisciplinary, reflecting the country’s social and cultural diversity, and must be comprised of at least five (5) members.

Res233-2020 lists the following membership requirements:

Persons with knowledge in research methodology and knowledge in the health field as well as in behavioral or social sciences
Persons with knowledge of legal and ethical matters
Community representatives; people outside the entities and institutions that comprise the ECs should also be included
In addition, Res233-2020 states that researchers must possess the relevant qualifications to carry out the investigation proposal, including basic training in ethics of research with human beings with the corresponding diplomas, certifications, titles, among others. Res233-2020 further indicates that the authorities, managers, or the main persons in charge of the entities and institutions that constitute the ECs cannot be members or preside over the members; the list of all members must be publicly accessible.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

Pursuant to Decree021-2017, for their operations, ECs must have stated rules and prepare a procedures manual that is approved by the research institution. Per Decree021-2017, the manual must provide rules and procedures for the following:

Composition and requirements that must be met by its members
Minimum EC infrastructure requirements (e.g., specific areas that allow for work performance under conditions that guarantee confidentiality; adequate computer equipment; and administrative personnel to allow an EC to function properly)
Meeting frequency
Specific quorum requirements
Administrative requirements for the presentation of files
Monitoring authorized research protocols
Preparing and approving meeting minutes
Filing related documentation
Obtaining specialist(s) advice on diseases or methodologies outside the EC’s expertise
Ensuring alternate committee members have been selected
Replacing a member with a conflict of interest
Renewal procedures
See Title IV, Chapter 7 of Decree021-2017 for detailed EC requirements.

Decree021-2017 and PER-21 further note that minimum infrastructure requirements for the operation of institutional ECs must include ensuring specific work environments that permit their work to be conducted under conditions that guarantee confidentiality, and computer equipment with sufficient capacity to handle all the information generated by the EC.

Ethics Committees for Human Subjects Health Research Other than Clinical Trials

As delineated in Res233-2020, ECs must have regulations and a procedures manual approved by the entity or institution that created them, specifying procedures, internal regulations, and other operational requirements.

Res233-2020 specifies that the procedures manual must include the following:

Conditions and terms for the appointment of members
Committee structure
Member responsibilities
Submitting research projects for review
Assessing the types of review
Classifying adopted decisions and processes to communicate these decisions
Developing the mechanism for determining whether a research project requires ethical review or should be exempt
Procedures for monitoring and surveillance of investigations, from the moment approved until terminated (including presenting amendments, deviations, adverse events, etc.)
Specifying required procedures and criteria for submitting expedited reviews
Reviewing projects based on ethical criteria (i.e., scientific validity and social value of the research, favorable benefit/risk balance ratio, equitable research participant selection, adequate informed consent process, respect for people, community participation and commitment)
Independent deliberation by members (i.e., EC members, researchers, sponsors, or other agents related to the research project under review should not be present)
Adopting research projects by consensus or by vote, and always with the participation of at least one (1) community representative and/or a member external to the entity or institution that constituted the EC
Requesting external assistance from independent consultants when necessary, taking into account the specialty or complexity of research under review
See Chapter 7 of Res233-2020 for detailed EC requirements.

Res233-2020 further notes that the entities and institutions that constitute the ECs must provide all of the economic, human, logistical, infrastructure, or the availability of other resources necessary for its operation.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Overview

According to Decree021-2017 and the G-EC-CTRev, the primary scope of information assessed by institutional ethics committees (ECs) (Comités Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEIs)) relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial. The EC scope also aligns with the principles delineated in the PeruConstitution and Decree011-2011, which assert that the defense of the human person and respect for their dignity are the supreme goal of society and the state.

As per Decree021-2017, Decree011-2011, and the G-EC-CTRev, ECs must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable. Per Decree021-2017, when a clinical trial is proposed for subordinate groups (e.g., students, health workers, employees, military members, police, prisoners, etc.), one (1) or more members of the population under study, or another person within this community capable of guarding the conditions and human rights that correspond to the group in question, should participate in the EC review. (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations).

Decree021-2017 and the G-EC-CTRev also state that the INS-registered and accredited ECs are responsible for ensuring an independent, timely, and competent review of all ethical aspects of the clinical trial protocol. They must act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved by evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants; confirming the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, and methods; and verifying the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards.

Res686-2020, in turn, states that in the ethical review of clinical studies of vaccines in humans, ECs must comply with the ethical criteria delineated in Res233-2020. Additionally, in all deliberations, ECs must ensure the following ethical criteria are present: social value and scientific validity of the research; favorable benefit/risk balance and risk minimization; fair selection of research participants; informed consent process; respect for people; and community participation and commitment. Therefore, per Res686-2020, an EC decision regarding the approval or disapproval of a vaccine clinical study protocol must have a solid and justified ethical basis in the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) criteria (PER-78).

Ethics Committees for Human Subjects Health Research Other than Clinical Trials

Res233-2020, which regulates human subjects research other than clinical trials of drugs or devices, similarly states that the focus of ECs that conduct human health research is to ensure the protection of the rights, safety, and well-being of the research participants. In addition, the INS must ensure the governance of all health research involving human beings is conducted ethically; the scientific validity and social value of the research is considered by the research studies; the equitable selection of research participants; the adequacy of the informed consent process; respect for the participants; and the participation and commitment of the communities. Res233-2020 further specifies that human studies include, but are not limited to, epidemiological research, genetic research, social science research, research on medical records, and research on stored samples, among others.

Per Res233-2020, the ECs are also responsible for conducting rigorous, timely, and competent ethical reviews of research projects based on the CIOMS' International Guidelines for Health-Related Research Involving Humans (PER-78). Furthermore, the ECs should monitor the progress of an approved research project until it has concluded.

Additionally, per Res233-2020, the research entities or institutions that constitute ECs conducting human health research must have policies of scientific integrity in accordance with international standards on the matter and the National Code of Scientific Integrity (PER-79), which includes appropriate investigation and sanction procedures.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

As per Decree021-2017, Res655-2019 (amending Decree021-2017), the INS-CTManual, Res252-2022 (amending the INS-CTManual), and the G-EC-CTRev, an INS-accredited EC must provide written confirmation of review and approval of the clinical trial protocol and the informed consent form (ICF) prior to the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) submitting the clinical trial application to the INS. Therefore, the INS and EC reviews may not be conducted in parallel.

According to Decree021-2017, each institutional EC determines its own review and approval timeline and continuing review requirements based on its internal regulations and standard operating procedures.

Per Decree028-2023 (amending Decree021-2017), a minor change(s) to the protocol and/or ICF only requires the approval of the INS registered and accredited EC that originally approved the current version, and the sponsor must communicate the change(s) in writing to the INS’s Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)) prior to its implementation. Decree028-2023 and Res184-2023 (amending Decree021-2017) also note that a minor change does not generate a new version of the protocol or ICF; however, if a subsequent amendment is made to the protocol, it must also contain the minor change(s) made. (See Timeline of Review section for timeline information on submitting minor changes to the DIIS.)

Res184-2023 specifically lists the following as minor changes to the protocol and/or ICF:

Typographical error corrections - A material unintentional error in a word, term, or expression that results from the writing, transcription, or translation of a specific expression that does not alter the meaning, objective, or intent of the word, term, or expression.
Modification of the conditions of clinical trial authorization or amendments - Updates made to the approved protocol and/or ICF, as a result of procedures for clinical trial modifications or amendments, linked to the change of protocol title, and/or name of the principal investigator, sponsor, and/or CRO; and/or study completion date, provided that the change is previously authorized by Director's Resolution or Official Letter issued by the DIIS, as a result of the corresponding administrative procedure.
Clarifications and/or modifications of an administrative or operational aspect - Changes made to the approved protocol and/or ICF for strictly administrative or operational reasons. In addition, a clarification refers to a clarification of the protocol and/or ICF information or content which does not alter the meaning, objective, or intention of the document.
See Res184-2023 for detailed descriptions of minor changes to the protocol and/or ICF.

Per Decree021-2017, ECs must also conduct regular monitoring, with a frequency based on the degree of risk to participants, but no less than once a year. Further, they must suspend or cancel the trial when participants are exposed to uncontrolled risk and inform the research institution, the sponsor and/or the CRO, and the DIIS of the suspension or cancellation.

(See the Submission Process and Timeline of Review sections for detailed submission process and timeline details.)

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Review fees are determined by each accredited institutional ethics committee (EC) (Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)).

EC Accreditation Fees

As delineated in Decree010-2025, the fee for accreditation of an EC is 3927.10 Peruvian Soles.

Payment Instructions

As indicated in Decree010-2025, the EC accreditation must be paid directly to the National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) via the following options:

In person at the INS
Via the Virtual Submission Platform (Mesa de Partes Virtual (MPV)) (PER-106)
See also PER-105 and G-MPVManual for more information on PER-106 or via the MPV link on the INS webpage. Refer to the Oversight of Ethics Committees section for additional information on EC accreditation requirements.

Decree010-2025 indicates that payments may also be made via electronic transfer. Transfers should be sent to:

Account Name: Banco de la Nación CTA
Account Number: 0000282413
Interbank Account Code: CCI 01800000000028241304

For questions on submitting a payment electronically via MPV (PER-106), send an email to mesadepartesvirtual@ins.gob.pe.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Overview

As set forth in Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, and PER-61, the INS’s Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)) is responsible for registering and accrediting institutional ethics committees (ECs) (Comités Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEIs)) listed in the INS’s REPEC (PER-89) (also referred to as REPECv2) to review and approve clinical trials. The DIIS must evaluate and verify EC compliance with the registration and accreditation standards established in the INS-CTManual. Per Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, PER-71, and PER-61, Peru requires clinical trial approval from an EC that is accredited by the INS’s National Registry of Accredited Institutional Ethics Committees (Registro Nacional de Comités de Ética en Investigación) (PER-61). See PER-102 for a list of accredited ECs and see PER-126 for EC registration instructions.

Ethics Committees for Human Subjects Health Research Other than Clinical Trials

As delineated in Res233-2020, the INS is also responsible for providing advice, guidance, and technical assistance to all ECs and their entities or institutions that review health research with human beings; organizing training and education activities for EC members and researchers; promoting integration and cooperation networks among participating ECs; promoting relations between the ECs and different entities linked to the research ethics field; providing access to international resources to strengthen research ethics; establishing flexible review procedures and mechanisms appropriate for an expedited and rigorous ethical review of human health research in disaster situations and disease outbreaks; and assigning the DIIS to disseminate information and supervising ECs at the national level per the ethical research guidelines delineated in Res233-2020.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

Per Decree021-2017, each research institution may establish an EC and register it with the INS via PER-89. (Refer to PER-102 for instructions on registering in the REPEC system.)

Per Decree021-2017, Res233-2020, the INS-CTManual, the G-ECRegProcs, and Decree010-2025, INS-registered ECs are only required to obtain accreditation if they are conducting a review of a clinical trial protocol involving pharmaceutical products. Decree021-2017, Res233-2020, the INS-CTManual, the G-ECRegProcs also specify that in addition to completing the accreditation/renewal application form (see PER-85 for FOR-DIIS-025), the applicant should complete the affidavit form (see PER-21 for FOR-DIIS-026) to demonstrate compliance with the accreditation standards delineated in the INS-CTManual. Both forms must be electronically submitted via PER-89. See PER-81 for instructional videos on registering on the REPEC platform.

PER-61 explains that once the registration form is electronically submitted, the user will receive a temporary EC registration number. Both the affidavit form and the registration forms should be printed and signed, and then attached along with the other accreditation documents required to be sent to the DIIS via the Document Processing Office located in the INS headquarters (refer to PER-61 and PER-98 for detailed requirements and instructions).

Decree021-2017 and the INS-CTManual state that accreditation is temporary and must be renewed every three (3) years. However, per Decree010-2025, the EC accreditation letter issued by the INS is not subject to renewal.

Per Decree021-2017, Res655-2019 (amending Decree021-2017), the INS-CTManual, and Decree010-2025, the following accreditation requirements must be completed (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

EC accreditation application sent to INS (PER-85), per Res0423-2019
Copy of the resolution/decision issued by the highest authority of the research institution authorizing EC operation
Copy of institutionally approved EC regulations and its Manual of Procedures submitted in electronic form (editable PDF)
Affidavit of compliance with INS-CTManual accreditation standards (PER-21), per Res0423-2019
Curriculum vitaes signed by each EC member submitted in electronic form (editable PDF)
Per the INS-CTManual, it is recommended that applications for EC accreditation renewals be submitted 30 calendar days before the end of term (see PER-85 for the EC accreditation/accreditation renewal form). Additionally, the INS-CTManual provides detailed information on the inspections that the INS-accredited ECs may be subject to before, during, and after EC registration.

Refer to the INS-CTManual and PER-61 for detailed submission instructions, and PER-85, PER-21, PER-22, and PER-35 for the EC accreditation application and EC affidavit of compliance forms.

Ethics Committees for Human Subjects Health Research Other than Clinical Trials

Res233-2020, which regulates human subjects research other than clinical trials of drugs or devices, requires ECs to be registered with the INS via the National Registry of Research Ethics Committees (Registro Nacional de Comités de Ética en Investigación), per the G-ECRegProcs. The G-ECRegProcs establishes standardized procedures for the DIIS to conduct EC registration evaluation in compliance with Res233-2020. As specified in the G-ECRegProcs, the DIIS’s Clinical Trials Subdirectorate (Subdirección de Ensayos Clínicos) is responsible for receiving, evaluating, and responding to EC registration requests. Depending on the implementation period, registration can be immediate, in which registration occurs at the time of the request, or progressive, in which implementation is carried out over a maximum period of two (2) years after initial EC registration. During the implementation of progressive requirements, the DIIS can provide advice and guidance to the EC upon request.

Per the G-ECRegProcs, in the case of immediate registration approval, once the registration application file is initially reviewed for completeness, it is forwarded to the application evaluator who verifies whether the file minimally complies with all the immediate requirements within 30 days. If the registration file meets the immediate requirements and the information provided complies with the INS-CTManual and the G-ECRegProcs provisions, the evaluator prepares a favorable response report and a draft record of registration, addressed to the Clinical Trials Subdirectorate. Once the favorable response report has been received, the Clinical Trials Subdirectorate evaluates and endorses it, sending the report and draft record of registration to the DIIS. The DIIS issues the EC certificate of registration and incorporates registration into the National Registry of Research Ethics Committees database. In addition, per the G-ECRegProcs, an EC registration may be suspended if the EC has not completed implementation of the progressive registration requirements within the two-year term. Refer to G-ECRegProcs for additional information on the DIIS’s registration review and approval process.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Overview

In accordance with Decree021-2017, Res655-2019 (amending Decree021-2017), the INS-CTManual, Res252-2022 (amending the INS-CTManual), and Decree010-2025, the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for submitting a clinical trial application to the INS to obtain approval to conduct a clinical trial in Peru. Per Decree021-2017, Res655-2019, the INS-CTManual, Res252-2022, and the G-EC-CTRev, the INS-accredited ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)) must first approve the research protocol and informed consent form (ICF), and the sponsor or the CRO must submit this information as part of the application dossier in order for the INS to conduct its review. Therefore, the INS and EC reviews may not be conducted in parallel. Decree021-2017 also states that sponsors not based in Peru are required to appoint a legal representative in the country who coordinates all communication with the INS’s Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)) for the trial’s duration, unless such responsibility is delegated to a CRO.

Regulatory Submission

REPEC Pre-Submission Registrations

As delineated in Decree021-2017, Res655-2019, Res252-2022, the INS-CTManual, PER-60, PER-59, PER-115, and Decree010-2025, prior to submitting an application for clinical trial authorization, the sponsor and the CRO must register with REPEC (PER-89) (also referred to as REPECv2). The INS-CTManual also notes that the sponsor registration application (PER-36) must be submitted in Spanish or accompanied by a proper translation if issued in a language other than Spanish. See the INS-CTManual, PER-60, and PER-59 for detailed sponsor and CRO registration instructions and PER-36 and PER-37 for the sponsor and CRO registration forms. Refer to Res393-2021 for additional information on the updated sponsor registration form (PER-36). See also PER-81 for instructional videos on registering with PER-89.

Additionally, as specified in PER-89, the REPECv2 platform should be used to obtain information or request feedback on procedures and operations related to a newly submitted clinical trial, to track the status of the authorization process, to identify critical events that require immediate attention via an alert system (e.g., expiring or expired authorizations and necessary notifications per Decree021-2017), and to obtain updated information on clinical trials being conducted in Peru. Also, as explained in PER-114, DIIS has initiated the process of migrating information from the older platform (REPECv1) (PER-91) to PER-89 to receive and manage clinical trial information on a single platform, therefore all new requests for clinical trial procedures should be entered through PER-89. However, per PER-88, any requests for procedures related to an already active clinical trial must still be requested using the older REPEC platform (PER-91). PER-114 further notes that requests for clinical trials that are in progress and have been entered through REPECv1 will not be migrated to REPECv2 until the procedure is concluded. See also PER-120 for frequently asked questions on REPEC.

Submissions

Pursuant to Res252-2022, all application related documents must be electronically submitted through the Virtual Submission Platform (Mesa de Partes Virtual (MPV)) (PER-106). According to PER-103, all notifications relating to procedures submitted via PER-106 will only be responded to in the PER-106 notification mailbox; notifications will not be communicated via email or other forms of communication.

Per PER-104, users must also register for the MPV system via PER-106 prior to submitting any application related documents. Registration is done through PER-106. Although, as indicated in PER-106, non-citizens cannot register directly with PER-106, and require an in-country representative to provide proof of citizenship to register using either a national identity document or an immigration card. Refer to the G-MPVManual and the G-VirtSubPlatfrm for detailed user instructions and procedures, and PER-105 and PER-127 for additional information on the MPV system.

As explained in Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, Res252-2022, PER-71, and PER-115, once the sponsor or the CRO is registered in the REPEC and MPV systems, a request for clinical trial authorization must be submitted electronically via PER-89. (See PER-24 for the online clinical trial application request form.) Per Res252-2022, the completed electronic request form should then be submitted via PER-106 along with the required documentation as set forth in Decree021-2017 and Res655-2019. PER-115 further explains that once the user receives a notification confirming that their registration request for clinical trial authorization has been approved, the online application request form (PER-24) should be printed, signed, and submitted in PDF or paper format along with the required documentation via PER-106.

Decree021-2017 and Res655-2019 further indicate that the clinical trial application and accompanying material (including the updated Investigator’s Brochure (IB)) must be provided in Spanish. Any document not in Spanish must be submitted with a corresponding translation. Decree021-2017 also states that if the protocol title is written in English, a single title in Spanish must be assigned for all purposes. In addition, per Decree021-2017 and Decree010-2025, the research protocol and the ICF must also be in Spanish and in the original language, if different from Spanish, and include a copy of the approval by an INS-accredited EC. Per Decree021-2017, research and complementary investigational product (IP) media labeling must also be printed in indelible ink in Spanish or English. The INS-CTManual also notes that notification reports for IPs should contain a translated summary in English and Spanish.

For amended protocols or ICF submissions, Res655-2019 and Decree010-2025 state that any changes should be electronically submitted (editable PDF) with track changes in Spanish and in the original language. The final protocol and ICF should include all of the incorporated amendments in an editable PDF file and comply with all of the previously discussed protocol submission requirements. PER-118 also notes that to modify the conditions of a clinical trial authorization, the sponsor or legally authorized representative in Peru must be previously registered and have a username and password to access PER-89. Refer to PER-118 for a detailed list of amendments with corresponding instructions that may be submitted for modification.

See also Res655-2019, PER-33, PER-34, PER-35, and PER-72 for additional details on submitting protocol amendments and the related forms. See PER-105 and G-MPVManual for information on submitting documents electronically via PER-106 or via the MPV link on the INS webpage.

PER-92 indicates that for questions or problems with PER-89, contact:

Jenny Parillo, Engineer
Phone: (511) 748 0000 Extension: 2616 or 984108368 (Cell)
Email: jparillo@ins.gob.pe

(Note: Application submission instructions in some sources including Res655-2019, the INS-CTManual, and PER-71, do not reflect this new electronic submission option.)

For reference, the following are applications and forms that may be used to submit various procedures via PER-106:

PER-24 for the clinical trial application for authorization
PER-28 for the application to change the principal investigator (PI)
PER-29 for the application to change the sponsor/CRO
PER-31 for the application to cancel a clinical trial
Res090-2025 for the form and requirements to request INS approval to supervise a clinical trial virtually (See Annex 1)
See also PER-123 for additional clinical trial forms.

Refer to the INS-CTManual, Res252-2022, and PER-71 for additional submission information. See Annex 1 in Res252-2022 for a flowchart delineating the clinical trial authorization process. See also the Submission Content section for detailed documentation requirements.

Ethics Review Submission

Because the submission process at individual institutional ECs will vary, applicants should review and follow their institution’s specific requirements.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Regulatory Authority Requirements

As specified in Decree021-2017, Res655-2019 (amending Decree021-2017), the INS-CTManual, Res252-2022 (amending the INS-CTManual), Decree010-2025, PER-71, PER-83, and PER-115 a clinical trial application submission must include the following documents (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Application for clinical trial authorization and proof of payment (PER-24) (per Annex B in Res655-2019)
Approval(s) issued by legal representative of institution(s) where research will be conducted (per Annex 1 in INS-CTManual and Annex 2 in Res252-2022)
Copy of the approved research protocol and informed consent form (ICF) stamped and signed by the ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)) in its entirety (per Annex 3 in INS-CTManual and Annex 3 in Res252-2022)
Research protocol in Spanish, and in the original language if different from Spanish, submitted in electronic form as an editable PDF (per Annex B in Res655-2019)
ICF in electronic form as an editable PDF (per Annex B in Res655-2019)
Updated Investigator’s Brochure (IB) in Spanish, and in the original language if different from Spanish, submitted in electronic form as an editable PDF (per Annex B in Res655-2019)
Affidavit stating no conflict of financial interest signed by the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) and the principal investigator (PI) (PER-34)
Affidavit signed by the PI and sponsor on preparation of research institution for trial (PER-35)
In the case of foreign sponsor: copy of proof of delegation of functions to the sponsor representative, duly authenticated by Peru’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Affidavit on compensation for participants signed by the sponsor or the CRO and PI (covers budget and expenses for any trial-related injuries) (PER-51)
Copy of current insurance policy purchased by the sponsor
List of clinical trial supplies (PER-42)
Information related to the investigational product (IP) quality (electronic form) (per Annex B in Res655-2019)
Updated curriculum vitaes (CVs) of all research team members with attached copies (PER-50) (per Annex B in Res655-2019)
Copy of documents demonstrating training in Good Clinical Practices and Research Ethics in human beings for the entire research team within the past three (3) years (PER-50) (per Annex B in Res655-2019)
Detailed national budget total for trial form (PER-25)
Copy of current record of authorized research institution(s) for clinical trials
Payment receipt for research center registration; in the case of multicenter trials, proof of payment for processing fee (per Annex B in Res655-2019)
Refer to Decree021-2017, Res655-2019, the INS-CTManual, Res252-2022, and PER-71 for detailed submission information.

See also the Submission Process section for additional submission requirements, and Annex 1 in Res252-2022 for a flowchart delineating the clinical trial authorization process.

Trial Extensions

Decree021-2017, Res655-2019, Decree010-2025, PER-72, PER-27, and PER-93 indicate that the sponsor or the CRO must submit the following documents for clinical trial application extensions: (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Application for extension of time to conduct the clinical trial, explaining the reasons for such request and stating the number and date of the proof of payment of processing fees (using FOR-DIIS-037 (PER-27)) per PER-72
Copy of the document approving the time extension granted by the legal representative of the research institution(s) where the trial will be conducted
Copy of the document containing the time extension approval by an INS-accredited EC
Report justifying the reasons for submitting the request
Current insurance policy
Ethics Committee Requirements

Specific institutional EC requirements for the documentation to be submitted by PIs are not provided in Peru’s regulatory sources. Although each EC has its own requirements, according to PER-77, ECs generally require PIs to submit the following documentation for ethics approval:

Letter from the PI to the EC Chairman
Basic format application as established by the corresponding EC
Research protocol
ICF and all the documentation related to the informed consent process
PI and co-investigator(s) CV(s)
Declaration of the PI and research center director/research institution head
Declaration of financial details and potential conflicts of interest of the PI
Sponsor’s insurance policy
PI’s training in good clinical practices and human research ethics
Clinical Protocol

As delineated in Decree021-2017, the clinical protocol should contain the following elements:

General information
Protocol summary
Background and justification (including IP description) (See Investigational Products topic for detailed coverage of this subject)
Objectives, valuation criteria, or specific results and hypotheses
Test design
Participant selection/withdrawal
Participant treatment
Study evaluation and procedures
Adverse events (See Safety Reporting section for additional information)
Statistical considerations
Data collection and monitoring
Data management and record maintenance
Ethical aspects
Publications results
Bibliography
Appendices
For complete protocol requirements, refer to Annex 1 of Decree021-2017.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Overview

Based on Decree021-2017, Res655-2019 (amending Decree021-2017), the INS-CTManual, and Res252-2022 (amending the INS-CTManual), the INS’s review and approval of an application to conduct a clinical trial is dependent upon obtaining ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)) approval from an INS-accredited EC. Therefore, the INS and EC reviews may not be conducted in parallel.

Regulatory Authority Approval

As per Law27444, Decree004-2019 (amending Law27444), and Decree010-2025, the INS is required to complete its review and approval of a clinical trial application in a maximum of 30 working days. Per Decree021-2017, this timeline includes the 30-day requirement for the National Authority for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Medical Products (la Autoridad Nacional de Productos Farmacéuticos, Dispositivos Médicos y Productos Sanitarios (ANM)) to issue a binding technical opinion on the safety and quality of the investigational product (IP). (Note: The ANM is also referred to as the General Directorate of Medicines, Supplies and Drugs (La Dirección General de Medicamentos Insumos y Drogas (DIGEMID)) (PER-109)).

Per Decree010-2025, the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) may file an appeal within 15 business days if the INS’s Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)) does not respond by the 30-day review deadline. Upon receipt of the DIIS’s decision, the sponsor or the CRO may also file an appeal within 15 business days to challenge the decision and request reconsideration. The INS Executive President must respond within 30 business days to the appeal.

Per Decree021-2017 and Decree010-2025, any modifications of the conditions under which a clinical trial was authorized, and amendments to the research protocol and/or informed consent, require prior authorization from the DIIS.

Per Decree010-2025, for requests to make minor change(s) to the protocol and/or informed consent form (ICF), the DIIS is required to complete its review and respond within 30 business days. If the DIIS does not respond by the 30-day review deadline, the sponsor or the CRO may file an administrative appeal within 15 business days of this deadline. Upon receipt of the DIIS’s decision, the sponsor or the CRO may also file a second appeal within 15 days to challenge the decision, and the INS Executive President must respond within 30 days. The approval and timelines specified for minor changes to the protocol report are applicable to requests to change the sponsor or the CRO of the clinical trial, requests to change the clinical trial title, and requests to extend the trial’s duration. Decree028-2023 (amending Decree021-2017) further specifies that a minor change(s) to the protocol and/or the ICF, also requires approval from the INS-registered and accredited EC that originally approved the current version. The sponsor or the CRO must also communicate the change(s) in writing to the DIIS within 10 business days prior to its implementation.(See Scope of Assessment and Scope of Review sections for additional information on submitting minor changes to the DIIS.)

Per Decree021-2017, Res655-2019, PER-72, and PER-93, the sponsor or the CRO should also request a trial extension within 30 calendar days prior to the trial’s expiration. The authorized trial extension will be valid for a maximum of 12 months from the date of issue.

Ethics Committee Approval

The EC review and approval process timeline varies by institution.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Overview

In accordance with Decree021-2017, Res655-2019 (amending Decree021-2017), the INS-CTManual, and Res252-2022 (amending the INS-CTManual), a clinical trial can only commence after the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) receives authorization from Peru’s INS and approval from an INS-accredited institutional ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)). No waiting period is required following the applicant’s receipt of these approvals.

According to Decree021-2017, Decree016-2011, the INS-CTManual, and Res252-2022, the sponsor or the CRO must also obtain approval from the National Authority for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Medical Products (la Autoridad Nacional de Productos Farmacéuticos, Dispositivos Médicos y Productos Sanitarios (ANM)) to manufacture or import investigational products (IPs) and to obtain an import license for the shipment of IPs to be used in the trial. (Note: The ANM is also referred to as the General Directorate of Medicines, Supplies and Drugs (La Dirección General de Medicamentos Insumos y Drogas (DIGEMID)) (PER-109)). (See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information).

Additionally, per Decree021-2017 and Res252-2022, the sponsor must ensure authorization by the research institution where the clinical trial will be carried out. Decree021-2017 further states that the sponsor must inform the INS’s Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)) when the first research participant is enrolled in Peru as well as the enrollment termination date in the country.

The INS-CTManual further specifies that the trials should be conducted in compliance with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (PER-53).

Res686-2020, in turn, states that clinical studies of vaccines in humans must be conducted in accordance with PER-53 and current national clinical trial regulations (Decree021-2017). Refer to Res686-2020 for detailed information and requirements associated with clinical vaccine studies.

Clinical Trial Agreement

According to Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, Res252-2022, and PER-71, the sponsor and principal investigator (PI) must sign an affidavit of compliance with the minimum requirements of the research center where the clinical trial will be executed (see PER-35). Further, per Res252-2022 and PER-71, both the sponsor and the PI must sign an affidavit establishing that there is no conflict of financial interest in executing the trial (PER-34).

In addition, per Decree021-2017, the DIIS refers to the requirements laid down in PER-53 for topics not addressed in Decree021-2017. Accordingly, PER-53 states that prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s) and the institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor or the CRO should provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and an investigator’s brochure (IB), and ensure that they agree to comply with good clinical practices and ethical standards. The sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement.

Clinical Trial Registration

As per Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, Res252-2022, and PER-71, the sponsor or the CRO must register the clinical trial application electronically using the INS’s REPEC (PER-89) (also referred to as REPECv2), at which time, a registration code is assigned to the application.

As specified in PER-89, the REPEC platform should be used to register all requests for procedures related to newly submitted clinical trials, to track the status of the authorization process, to identify critical events that require immediate attention via an alert system (e.g., expiring or expired authorizations and necessary notifications per Decree021-2017, and to obtain updated information on clinical trials being conducted in Peru). However, per PER-88, any requests for procedures related to already active clinical trials must still be submitted using the older REPEC platform via PER-91. See PER-81 for instructional videos on registering with the new REPEC platform. Refer to the Oversight of Ethics Committees section for instructions on EC registration/accreditation and the Submission Process section for instructions on sponsor/CRO registration.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Safety Reporting Definitions

According to Decree021-2017, Decree021-2017-Correct, the G-SafeRpt, and the G-CTSafety, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Peru’s safety reporting requirements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Adverse Event (or Adverse Experience) (AE) – Any event or situation harmful to the health of the research participant to whom an investigational product (IP) has been administered, which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with its administration
Adverse Reaction (AR) – Any AE in which there is a clearly defined causal relationship with an IP or there is at least a reasonable possibility of causation, which occurs regardless of any dose administered to that participant
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Reaction (SAR) – Any AE/AR that results in death, is life threatening, requires or extends hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or causes a congenital anomaly/birth defect
Unexpected Adverse Reaction – An AR where the nature or severity is inconsistent with the applicable IP information, i.e., it is not described in the investigator’s brochure (IB) and/or the technical data sheet
Suspected Unexpected and Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR) – Any serious AE/AR in which there is at least a reasonable possibility of a causal relationship with the IP and the nature and severity of the event/reaction is not described in the IB and/or technical data sheet
Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

According to Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, and the G-SafeRpt, the principal investigator (PI) and the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) are responsible for monitoring the safety of the IP. As specified in Decree021-2017 and the G-SafeRpt, the PI is also responsible for notifying the sponsor or the CRO or the ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)) of any SAEs/SARs and SUSARs within a period not exceeding one (1) calendar day from the date the event occurs, or, the PI becomes aware of the incident.

Decree021-2017 notes that the PI must also follow up with a detailed written report. Per the G-SafeRpt, the PI must record the SAEs/SARs and notify the sponsor according to the procedure described in the study protocol.

Furthermore, per Decree021-2017, the PI must inform the sponsor or the CRO and the EC of the following:

Any SAE/SAR that has occurred to a participant following the trial’s completion
Any non-serious AEs/ARs identified as determinants of safety assessments in the protocol within the periods specified
In addition, the G-SafeRpt states that if the PI becomes aware of SAEs/SARs occurring after the end of the trial, they should notify the sponsor or the CRO and the EC.

Lastly, per Decree021-2017, the PI must provide the sponsor or the CRO, the EC, and the Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)) within Peru’s INS with any additional safety information requested.

Res233-2020, which regulates human subjects research other than clinical trials of drugs or devices, indicates that investigators should immediately report to the EC and the corresponding authorities any AE or unanticipated risk to research participants related to the research. Furthermore, in cases where protocol or informed consent process changes are necessary to prevent harm to the participants, the investigators must submit report deviations within 24 hours.

Sponsor Responsibilities

According to Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, the G-SafeRpt, and PER-72, the sponsor or the CRO should report IP-related AEs/ARs, SAEs/SARs, and SUSARs and provide these reports to the DIIS. Decree021-2017 also notes that the sponsor or the CRO should also maintain detailed records of all AEs/ARs communicated by the PIs.

Per Decree021-2017, Decree021-2017-Correct, the INS-CTManual, PER-72, and PER-38, the sponsor or the CRO and the PI are required to submit all expected and unexpected SAEs/SARs (related or not per PER-72) and SUSAR reports electronically through the Serious Adverse Events Virtual Reporting System (Sistema de Reporte de Eventos Adversos Serios (REAS-NET)) (PER-69) to the DIIS within seven (7) calendar days from the occurrence of the incident, or as soon as the sponsor is aware of the incident. According to PER-77, PER-69 should be used to follow up on already reported SAEs, while REPEC (PER-89) (also referred to as REPECv2) should be used to report new SAEs.

The G-SafeRpt specifies that the sponsor or the CRO is responsible for evaluating, categorizing, and reporting all SAEs/SARs and SUSARs that occur within the country through REAS-NET (PER-69). The notification should be completed using the online form, FOR-DIIS-046 (PER-38).

Per the INS-CTManual, the electronic form (PER-38) submitted via REAS-NET (PER-69) should be printed and signed by the sponsor or the CRO. The INS-CTManual and the G-SafeRpt state that the submitted information above must be updated with any additional relevant information in a follow-up tracking report within eight (8) calendar days. The G-SafeRpt also notes that if the causality assessment of the SAE conducted by the investigator differs from the causality assessment made by the sponsor, the investigator’s assessment cannot be modified. The INS-CTManual further states that both the follow-up report and the final report completed in REAS-NET (PER-69) should be submitted electronically and in print formats to the DIIS.

In addition, per Decree021-2017, Decree021-2017-Correct, and PER-72, the sponsor or the CRO must notify the DIIS, the ECs, and the PIs within a maximum period of seven (7) calendar days of any findings that could adversely affect the safety of research participants, have an impact on the conduct of the study, or alter the benefit/risk balance. This report should be prepared independently and separately from other required AE/AR submission deadlines outlined in this section. Decree021-2017, Decree021-2017-Correct, PER-4, and PER-12 further state that the sponsor or the CRO is also required to notify the DIIS of critical or very serious and major or serious deviations to the clinical trial protocol within a maximum period of seven (7) calendar days from the time of becoming aware of the incident.

The G-SafeRpt further explains that if the sponsor or the CRO is aware of safety findings that are not covered within the scope of an SAE/SAR or SUSAR, these findings require another measure or action such as a security emergency measure, an amendment to the protocol or informed consent, or the suspension or cancellation of the clinical trial. The sponsor should communicate this information to the DIIS through a detailed report that includes the measures and actions taken at the local and international levels, if already established. The ECs and PI should also be notified within seven (7) calendar days. The information must be written in Spanish and English, be contained in an electronic medium (CD), and be delivered to the DIIS’s Document Processing Office. The sponsor is subsequently required to initiate administrative procedures that correspond to the measure or action taken, and in accordance with the requirements established by the clinical trial regulations. Refer to the G-SafeRpt for examples of administrative procedures.

As delineated in Decree021-2017, the G-SafeRpt, and PER-72, the sponsor is also required to submit, electronically on a quarterly or semi-annual basis, SAE/SAR and SUSAR reports occurring internationally, to the DIIS and the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) whether they have occurred in the authorized trial, in other trials with the same IP, or in a context of different use. The G-SafeRpt specifies that the information should be presented on magnetic media. Refer to Annex 1 in the G-SafeRpt for data requirements. PER-72 further indicates that the sponsor should send the SUSAR reports for events that have occurred abroad as soon as possible to the investigator using CIOMS Form I (PER-18). The investigator, in turn, will send the reports to the EC. Further, per Decree021-2017, the DIIS must notify the National Authority for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Medical Products (la Autoridad Nacional de Productos Farmacéuticos, Dispositivos Médicos y Productos Sanitarios (ANM)) of any SAEs/SADRs and SUSARs caused by an IP being used in an authorized trial in Peru within a maximum period of 15 working days after receiving notification about the incident. The INS-CTManual also indicates authorized ANM personnel will have access to SAEs/SADRs and SUSARs that have occurred in Peru via REAS-NET (PER-69). (Note: The ANM is also referred to as the General Directorate of Medicines, Supplies and Drugs (La Dirección General de Medicamentos Insumos y Drogas (DIGEMID)) (PER-109)). See also the G-CTSafety for information on actions taken by the DIIS in response to SAEs/SARs, SUSARs, and safety reports.

Other Safety Reports

As delineated in the INS-CTManual and the G-SafeRpt, the sponsor or the CRO must also submit an annual IP safety report (DSUR) to the DIIS. Decree021-2017 further specifies that the DSUR should be sent to the DIIS and the ANM. Per the INS-CTManual, the translation of the annual report summary must be presented in English and Spanish. The G-SafeRpt explains that the DSUR should be prepared after the first authorization of the clinical trial in any country. This is referred to as the Development International Birth Day (DIBD). The report should comply with the ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (PER-52). The sponsor must complete form FOR-DIIS-048 (PER-45) online in Spanish as well as submit a copy of the DSUR to the DIIS on CD.

In addition, per the G-SafeRpt, the sponsor or the CRO must describe in the protocol the SAEs that will not be reported promptly because they are expected to occur in the study population with a frequency independent from their exposure to the IP. The sponsor or the CRO is also required to describe in the protocol the procedures for monitoring SAEs produced by the IP. Moreover, depending on the trial design, the pathology, and the IP, the sponsor or the CRO will describe in the protocol the notification procedures for non-serious AEs. Decree021-2017 also notes that the sponsor or the CRO should continuously evaluate IP safety and implement an IP security monitoring system.

According to the INS-CTManual and the G-SafeRpt, in cases of prenatal exposure due to a pregnant woman’s participation in a clinical trial, the PI, the sponsor or the CRO is required to submit form FOR-DIIS-047 (PER-39) to notify the DIIS of the SAE/SAR or SUSAR. Per the G-SafeRpt, the sponsor submits the form and the procedures for monitoring and controlling the pregnancy and newborn on magnetic media. The notification of a pregnancy must be made within seven (7) calendar days. The INS-CTManual also indicates prenatal monitoring reports must also be prepared during pregnancy, childbirth, and for six (6) months postpartum following the occurrence. See the Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates section for additional information on this population.

See Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, the G-SafeRpt, and PER-38 for detailed sponsor/CRO reporting requirements.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

As per Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, the G-SafeRpt, and PER-72, all AEs/ARs, SAEs/SARs, and SUSARs must be reported electronically by the sponsor or the CRO using REAS-NET (PER-69). PER-12 specifies that notifications of very serious and major or serious protocol deviations should be submitted using FOR-DIIS-053 (PER-40) via (REPEC) (PER-89). According to PER-77, PER-69 should be used to follow up on already registered SAEs, and new SAEs must be reported via PER-89. PER-114 further notes that reports of SAEs (Reportes de eventos adversos serios (REAs)) and deviations can be submitted via PER-89, regardless of the year of trial authorization. However, REAs and deviations that have been submitted via the older REPECv1 platform (PER-91) will remain on this platform for consultation, if required.

(Refer to PER-38 for the DIIS SAE/SAR form, FOR-DIIS-046. All SAEs/SARs and SUSARs must also be reported on the CIOMS Form I (PER-18). The INS-CTManual further notes that the sponsor or the CRO should also submit a printed copy of the CIOMS report in Spanish or English to the DIIS.

Pursuant to the G-SafeRpt, to report post-study AEs, the sponsor or the CRO should send an email to consultaensayos@ins.gob.be to coordinate with the person in charge of computer systems and grant the person access to REAS-NET (PER-69) to complete and submit the online form FOR-DIIS-046 (PER-38). SAEs/SAR notifications following a trial’s completion should remain in the research center archives.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Interim and Annual Progress Reports

National Institute of Health (INS)

As delineated in Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, PER-72, PER-47, and PER-14, the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) must submit a progress report for each institution in which a trial is conducted from the date of the study’s authorization to the Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)) within Peru’s INS. The report should be submitted quarterly or biannually to the INS’s REPEC (PER-89) (also referred to as REPECv2) for each of the approved research centers. Per the INS-CTManual, this report should be submitted regardless of the enrollment status in each site. The INS-CTManual and PER-14 further specify that the submission deadline is up to seven (7) calendar days after completing the quarterly or half-yearly period. The sponsor or the CRO should print and sign the electronic form and deliver it to the INS’s Document Processing Office within 20 working days. Refer to the INS-CTManual for additional information, and PER-47 for the progress report form and detailed submission instructions.

PER-92 further notes that while the older REPECv1 platform (PER-91) is closed for the entry of progress reports, research center final reports, national final reports, and international final reports, the reports will remain in the system for consultation.

In addition, Decree021-2017 and PER-72 state that the progress report must be sent in print and electronic media, and include the following information:

Number of patients enrolled in the study and status (e.g., in treatment, retired from study, completed study, or who are not ready to enroll) (Decree021-2017)
Summary of serious adverse events/adverse reactions (SAEs/SARs) and non-serious adverse events (AEs)/adverse reactions (ARs) related to the investigational product (IP), and deviations occurring in the corresponding period (Decree021-2017)
Number of patients who failed the screening (PER-72)
Number of patients with clinical failure (PER-72)
According to PER-72, the following documentation should also be attached to the progress report:

Quarterly or half-yearly report of deviations/breaches to the protocol that occurred during the stated timeframe for every research center
Quarterly or half-yearly report of the serious and unexpected adverse reactions (SUSARs) related to the IP that have occurred abroad
Ethics Committees

As per Decree021-2017, the principal investigator (PI) is also responsible for submitting clinical trial progress and final reports to the research institution and the institutional ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)).

Res233-2020, which regulates human subjects research other than clinical trials of drugs or devices, indicates that researchers should submit progress reports, final reports, suspension reports, and early termination reports, among others, to the EC per the terms established by the committee.

Final Report

As delineated in Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, PER-72, PER-48, and PER-14, the sponsor or the CRO must submit a research center final report via PER-89 for each of the participating sites for a specific clinical trial within 30 calendar days following the closing visit made by the monitor. Per the INS-CTManual, this information should be provided regardless of the enrollment status of each site. The INS-CTManual notes that the electronic form should also be printed and signed by the sponsor or the CRO and delivered to the INS’s Document Processing Office within 20 working days. Refer to the INS-CTManual for additional information, and PER-48 for the final report form.

Decree021-2017 also states that the final report should include the following information:

Number of screened, enrolled, and retired patients who completed the trial
Summary of SAEs/SARs and non-serious AEs/ARs related to the IP, and deviations occurring since the date of the last progress report
National Final Reports

Per Decree021-2017, Decree021-2017-Correct, the INS-CTManual, PER-72, and PER-14, national final reports should be submitted via PER-89 for the DIIS review within 60 calendar days following the date of the final report submission of the last research center. Per the INS-CTManual and PER-72, the national final reports (PER-49) should be electronically submitted.

The DIIS will send a copy of the final national report of clinical trials to the National Authority for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Medical Products (la Autoridad Nacional de Productos Farmacéuticos, Dispositivos Médicos y Productos Sanitarios (ANM)) within 30 business days following receipt of the report. (Note: The ANM is also referred to as the General Directorate of Medicines, Supplies and Drugs (La Dirección General de Medicamentos Insumos y Drogas (DIGEMID)) (PER-109)).

Per the INS-CTManual, the electronic form should be printed and signed by the sponsor or the CRO and delivered to the INS’s Document Processing Office within seven (7) working days. If applicable, a report of the study results and conclusions must be attached as established in the INS-CTManual.

For clinical trials performed only in Peru, the report must also be submitted with the final results and conclusions per the G-CTReptReslts within a maximum period of six (6) months following the trial’s conclusion as indicated in Decree021-2017, Decree021-2017-Correct, the INS-CTManual, and PER-72. The G-CTReptReslts provides guidelines on the presentation, structure, and content of the information to be presented in PER-49, and recommends that structure and content of the report follow the guidelines specified in the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (PER-124). The study report must be submitted electronically and attached to the printed form (PER-49). If the report information is not available when PER-49 is submitted, it should be submitted at a later date by simple letter addressed to the DIIS General Directorate, with the information electronically attached as copyable text. A justification must be included if the deadlines specified in Decree021-2017 have been met.

In addition, per the G-CTReptReslts, the structure and content may be adapted by the sponsor based on the clinical trial design, objectives, and type of IP. The report may be submitted in English. The following must also be included as part of this report:

A list of protocol versions and amendments under which the clinical trial was conducted
A list of research participants (identification codes) who received the IP(s) according to specific lots (if more than one lot was used) and by research center
A table of randomization codes, research participant (identification codes), and assigned treatment according to research center
Decree021-2017 also explains that the national final report should include the following information:

Number of screened, enrolled, retired patients who completed the trial
Summary of SAEs/SARs and non-serious AEs/ARs related to the IP, and deviations that occurred
For trials performed only in Peru, the report should also include the final results and conclusions of the trial
Refer to the INS-CTManual and G-CTReptReslts for additional information, and PER-49 for the national final report form.

International Final Reports

As delineated in Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, and PER-72, international final reports should be submitted to PER-89 within 12 months following the completion of the last clinical trial in all international research centers. Per the INS-CTManual, the sponsor or the CRO should also print and sign the electronic form and deliver it to the INS’s Document Processing Office within 20 working days. In addition, a report of the study results and conclusions should be attached as established in the INS-CTManual. PER-72 notes that the report should include the results and the study conclusions before publication. Refer to the INS-CTManual for additional information, and PER-46 for the international final report form.

Per G-CTReptReslts, the national final report guidelines are also applicable to international final reports. See the National Final Reports section above for details that are also applicable to PER-46.

Results Publication

Further, according to Decree021-2017, the INS, in coordination with the sponsor, must submit a Results Publication after the final national or international report is completed to provide the results of authorized and performed clinical trials through PER-89 using form FOR-DIIS-058 (PER-23). The sponsor is also obligated to submit an article to a national or international scientific journal that strictly reflects the final report submitted to the DIIS and notify DIIS of this submission using form FOR-DIIS-059 (PER-41). The published article must also be sent to the INS and the research institution in print and electronic media.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Decree021-2017 defines a sponsor as an individual, group of individuals, company, institution, organization, including academic organizations, with legal representation in the country, and duly registered in the corresponding public registries. The sponsor assumes responsibility for the initiation, maintenance, completion, and financing of a clinical trial. The sponsor must be registered in the INS’s REPEC (PER-89) (also referred to as REPECv2) prior to requesting trial authorization. When an independent researcher initiates and assumes full responsibility for a clinical trial, they assume the role of sponsor.

Decree021-2017 also states that sponsors not based in Peru are required to appoint a legal representative who channels all the communication with the INS’s Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)) or the trial’s duration.

In addition, per Decree021-2017, a sponsor can authorize a contract research organization (CRO) with legal status and an office in Peru to carry out certain work and obligations regarding the trial. However, the sponsor is ultimately responsible for the execution of the research protocol and the results of the trial.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Overview

Per Decree021-2017, the INS’s Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)), follows the requirements provided in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (PER-53) for topics not addressed in Decree021-2017. Accordingly, PER-53 states that the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical trial, taking into account the appropriateness and availability of the study site and facilities. Investigators should also be qualified by education, training, and experience to assume responsibility for the proper conduct of the trial. Decree021-2017 further specifies that, in addition to professional competence, the sponsor or the CRO should also ensure that investigators have enough time to conduct the trial and agree to comply with good clinical practice (GCP) and ethical standards. Res233-2020 also requires investigators to have basic training in ethical research with human beings. Refer to PER-53 for additional information on investigator requirements.

Additionally, per Decree010-2025, to change the principal investigator (PI) to an approved clinical trial, the sponsor or the CRO is required to submit the following:

Request for PI change justifying the reasons, including the number and date of the payment receipt of the processing fee (See Regulatory Fees section)
Updated undocumented curriculum vitae of the proposed PI (per the INS-CTManual and form FOR-DIIS-031 (PER-50))
New informed consent form(s) (ICFs) approved by the ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI))
Per Decree021-2017 and Res655-2019 (amending Decree021-2017), research institutions must also register with the INS’s REPEC (PER-89) (also referred to as REPECv2), but are no longer required to provide proof of this registration in the clinical trial authorization application. As delineated in Res655-2019 and Decree010-2025, the research institution’s legal representative must submit an application for registration that includes the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

A code from the National Registry of Institutions that Provide Health Services (Registro Nacional de Instituciones Prestadoras de Servicios de Salud (RENIPRESS)) (Refer to PER-80 for instructions on how to register a health service provider institution in RENIPRESS.)
Details of the categorization level assigned to the research institution interested in obtaining registration as a research center to conduct clinical trials (per Res546-2011, categorization is based on the institution’s levels of complexity and functional characteristics)
Number and date of processing fees proof of payment
Duly completed registration form prepared (per Annex 3 of Decree021-2017)
In addition, Decree021-2017 requires research centers to register with REPEC (PER-89) to carry out clinical trials at the research institution’s request. According to PER-73, research centers should apply electronically via REPEC (PER-89), submit the printed application form, FOR-DIIS-022 (see Res085-2025) per Res0423-2019, and complete the printed affidavit form, FOR-DIIS-023 (PER-44). Research center registration is valid for three (3) years. Refer to PER-73 for detailed registration instructions and PER-90 for a research center registration checklist. According to PER-73, public and private sector research centers must also be registered in (REPEC) (PER-89), at the request of the research institution, to carry out clinical trials. See also FOR-DIIS-036 (PER-26), FOR-DIIS-040 (PER-43), and FOR-DIIS-031 (PER-50) for related research center applications and forms. Refer to the Regulatory Fees section for research center registration fee information.

Decree010-2025 states that the sponsor or the CRO also must submit the following documents to expand the number of research centers participating in a clinical trial:

Request to expand the number of research centers, justifying the reasons for the expansion and including information on proof of payment
Approval(s) issued by legal representative of institution(s) where research will be conducted (per Annex 1 in INS-CTManual and Annex 2 in Res252-2022)
Copy of the approved research protocol and ICF issued by the accredited EC (CIEI) (per Annex 3 in INS-CTManual and Annex 3 in Res252-2022)
ICF(s) prepared (per Annex 4 of Decree021-2017)
Affidavit stating no conflict of financial interest signed by the sponsor or the CRO and the PI (per Annex 4 in INS-CTManual, Annex 4 in Res252-2022, and form FOR-DIIS-063 (PER-34))
Affidavit signed by the PI and sponsor on preparation of research institution for trial (per Annex 4 in INS-CTManual, Annex 5 in Res252-2022, and form FOR-DIIS-064 (PER-35))
Updated undocumented curriculum vitaes (CVs) of all research center team members with attached copies of documents demonstrating training in GCP within the past three (3) years (per the INS-CTManual, Annex 7 in Res252-2022, and form FOR-DIIS-031 (PER-50))
Per PER-113, the DIIS has established the Validity of the Record of Registration of Research Center in compliance with Law1452 (amending Law27444). In accordance with Law1452, any Research Center Registration Certificate (Constancia de Registro de Centros de Investigación (RCI)) that is valid as of September 16, 2018, and all those certificates subsequently issued, are valid for an indefinite period, and are therefore exempt from the registry renewal process delineated in Decree021-2017. However, the DIIS may continue to carry out subsequent scheduled or unscheduled audits in accordance with its authority, and may revoke the certificate, if it verifies changes in the conditions essential to obtaining the registration.

PER-131 further states that the RCIs are no longer valid for research centers that do not have active clinical trials and whose RCI was issued prior to September 16, 2015. Research institutions that intend to continue carrying out clinical trials may request an update of the RCI validity by completing and signing the printed application form, FOR-DIIS-022 (see Res085-2025), and affidavit form, FOR-DIIS-023 (PER-44), and submitting them via REPEC (PER-89). Research institutions must also notify the Virtual Submission Platform (Mesa de Partes Virtual (MPV)) (PER-106) of the submitted procedures, and attach form FOR-DIIS-022 (see Res085-2025) and form FOR-DIIS-023 (PER-44). Additionally, as indicated in PER-130, sponsors or CROs are obligated to verify that the research center where a clinical trial will be conducted is authorized in the specialty related to the proposed trial. If the research center did not provide the related specialty information in its REPEC registration, the research institution’s legal representative, as research center administrator, must submit a request to the DIIS to modify the registration to include the required specialty. The new RCI must also include the required specialty. All of these procedures must be carried out prior to the request for authorization of a clinical trial.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

Decree021-2017 states that the sponsor is required to appoint a legal representative in the country for the trial’s duration when based outside of Peru. Per Decree021-2017, the in-country legal representative channels all communication with the DIIS during the study’s execution, unless this responsibility is delegated to a CRO. As specified in Decree021-2017, the sponsor may transfer any or all of the study related duties and functions to a CRO. However, the sponsor is ultimately responsible for the execution of the research protocol and results of the clinical trial.

See PER-7 for detailed documentation submission requirements for a foreign sponsor to delegate an in-country legal representative or for a local sponsor to appoint a legal representative. Decree021-2017 further explains that the in-country representative must also be registered in REPEC (PER-89) for the trial’s duration. Refer to the Submission Process section for additional REPEC registration instructions.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

Decree021-2017 requires the sponsor to provide data on the Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) including its composition, a summary of its role and notification procedure, a statement of independence from the sponsor, and any conflicts of interest. Additionally, the sponsor should specify where to find other details about the by-laws not included in the protocol or explain why a DSMB is not necessary.

Multicenter Studies

Per Decree021-2017, multicenter clinical trials are carried out by more than one (1) investigator and require an appointed coordinator responsible for processing all of the data and analyzing the results.

In addition, according to PER-53, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor, and given EC (CIEI) approval
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication among investigators is facilitated
In addition, the sponsor is responsible for the organization of a coordinating committee and/or selection of coordinating investigator(s), if they are to be utilized.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Insurance

As set forth in Decree021-2017, the G-EC-CTRev, and PER-71, it is a legal requirement for the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) to carry a valid insurance policy for the expected duration of the study for any unforeseen injury to research participants. Per Res0423-2019, the sponsor or the CRO should sign an affidavit (PER-51) guaranteeing an active insurance policy is in place according to requirements in the INS-CTManual.

Decree021-2017 also specifies that the sponsor or the CRO must obtain insurance coverage in Peru or have a legal representative in Peru who will represent the sponsor or the CRO, if the policy is from a foreign company. The insurance policy must be in force until the date of submission of the National Final Report. At the end of this period, it should be renewed whenever there is still a possibility of late damages arising from the adjudication of injuries resulting from the clinical trial.

Compensation

Injury or Death

According to Decree021-2017 and PER-71, in addition to guaranteeing an active insurance policy is in place, the affidavit (PER-51) submitted by the sponsor or the CRO also certifies a financial fund is immediately and conveniently available. The fund ensures free medical treatment to participants who suffer any trial-related injuries as long as the insurance policy is activated.

In addition, as described in Decree021-2017, compensation will be awarded in the following circumstances:

Any damage to the research participant as a result of participation in the clinical trial
Any damage that occurred during pregnancy or that would have occurred to the newborn in the case of pregnancy in a female research participant or in the couple of the male research participant, as long as it is a result of their participation in the trial
Economic damages derived directly from earlier stated damages, provided that the damage is not inherent to the pathology under study, or to the individual evolution of the research participant
The sponsor’s obligation to award compensation is independent of the validity or available coverage of the contracted insurance.

Trial Participation

Per Decree021-2017, research participants may receive reasonable compensation from the sponsor for extraordinary expenses incurred and loss of productivity arising from their participation, which will be specified in the informed consent. The institutional ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)) will evaluate this form of compensation on a case-by-case basis and determine whether it unduly influences the consent of the research participant.

PER-15 further states the following:

Research participants may receive compensation in order to reimburse them for expenses (e.g., transportation, accommodation, communication, food expenses) and/or compensate the loss of productivity, time, among others, derived from their participation. Any compensation to the participants of the investigation must be reasonable and proportionate and, in no case, may it constitute undue influence.
In order to safeguard the rights of research participants, researchers and sponsors should take into account the personal and specific considerations of each research participant for the calculation of compensation for expenses incurred arising from their participation and,
ECs must evaluate the compensation amount, paying special attention to the information that appears in the informed consent forms to ensure that the established compensations consider the possible conditions of each research participant
Post-Trial Access

As delineated in Decree021-2017, post-study access to investigational product(s) must be anticipated before the study commences, and this information must be provided to research participants during the informed consent process. In order to require post-study IP access, the following will be considered: the severity of the medical condition in question and the expected effect of withdrawing or modifying treatment (whether discontinuing treatment could negatively affect the research participant’s health or well-being); the absence of satisfactory therapeutic alternatives in Peru for the participant’s medical condition; sufficient information on the IP’s efficacy and safety; and a positive benefit-risk balance for the intervention. In addition, the principal investigator (PI) must be able to demonstrate that the IP is beneficial to the participant. Post-study IP access is contingent upon the PI's discretion and will be provided as long as a benefit exists. The sponsor must also ensure that the participant has access to the IP until it is accessible through the general directorates of the Ministry of Health of Peru (Ministerio de Salud del Perú (MINSA)).

Additionally, Decree021-2017 explains that authorization for post-study IP access may be granted through the following mechanisms:

Authorization of a clinical trial corresponding to a Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS))-approved study extension
IP authorization by the National Authority for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Medical Products (la Autoridad Nacional de Productos Farmacéuticos, Dispositivos Médicos y Productos Sanitarios (ANM). In this case, the PI considering post-study IP access for the research participant must notify the trial sponsor, who must, in turn, request ANM authorization, which is granted on a case-by-case basis.
(See Title X of Decree021-2017 for documentation submission requirements) (Note: The ANM is also referred to as the General Directorate of Medicines, Supplies and Drugs (La Dirección General de Medicamentos Insumos y Drogas (DIGEMID)).

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As stated in Decree021-2017, the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for ensuring that all the information on the investigational product (IP) and the additional documentation corresponds to the research protocol and complies with good clinical practice (GCP) as provided in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (PER-53), as well as the requirements established in Decree021-2017. PER-53 further explains that the sponsor or the CRO is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, documented (recorded), and reported in compliance with the protocol, PER-53, Decree021-2017, and other applicable regulatory requirements.

Per Decree021-2017, the sponsor or the CRO must sign a declaration guaranteeing that the investigators will allow institutional ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)) supervision and clinical trial inspections by the National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS))’s Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)), including direct access to the clinical trial documentation. PER-53 further states the sponsor is responsible for securing agreements from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities.

In addition, per PER-53, the sponsor or the CRO should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, focusing on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that includes:

During protocol development, identification of processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results
Identification of risks to critical trial processes and data
Evaluation of the identified risks against existing risk controls
Decisions on which risks to mitigate and/or which risks to accept
Documentation of quality management activities and communication to those involved in or affected by these activities
Periodic review of risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant
In the clinical study report, a description of the quality management approach implemented in the trial and a summary of important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken
Monitoring Requirements

As part of the clinical protocol requirements, Decree021-2017 notes that the following data collection and monitoring activities should be implemented:

Develop plans to evaluate and collect baseline, outcome, and other study data, including a process to improve data quality and a description of instruments used in the study along with their reliability and validity, if known
Prepare plans to promote participant retention and complete follow up, including a list of data to be collected from participants who leave the trial or deviate from it
Document (or provide) data monitoring committee details including its composition, a summary of its role and notification procedure, a statement of its independence from the sponsor, and its conflicts of interest. Details about by-laws not included in the protocol should be specified, or an explanation about why this committee is not needed
Describe trial monitoring arrangements/audits and sponsor’s statement to ensure that investigators will allow monitoring, audits, EC monitoring, and DIIS trial inspections, including direct access to clinical trial documentation
Provide plans to enter, encode, protect, and save data, including any process to improve its quality
Specify where data management procedure details not included in the protocol can be found
No specific timeframe is provided for the audit process.

Per the INS-CTManual, for regular clinical trial inspections scheduled by the DIIS, when inspection findings are critical, the sponsor or the CRO is required to submit a defense within a period of no more than seven (7) working days following receipt of the inspection report. If the inspection observations are minor or major, the sponsor or the CRO should submit their defense within a period of no more than 15 working days, after receiving the inspection report. The inspector will issue an official notice of compliance within a period of no more than 15 business days if the sponsor or the CRO addresses the issues identified in the report in a timely way. Please refer to section 7.9 of the INS-CTManual for detailed information on preparing for the DIIS scheduled clinical trial inspections and responding to the inspection reports received.

By comparison, the G-CTInspec indicates that the inspected subject must present their case no later than 10 working days following receipt of the observations notice. If the inspected subject corrects the observations, the inspection team will send an Observations Notice to remove the issues identified within 15 working days. If there is no correction and the inspected subject is required to submit administrative documentation (in addition to technical support when applicable) to remove an observation, a second Observations Notice is sent, granting a new deadline and urging compliance. If the inspected subject submits the required documentation, an official letter of conformity shall be given within 15 working days. See the G-CTInspec for additional information. See also Scope of Assessment section for detailed DIIS inspection team responsibilities.

Per Decree021-2017 and Res064-2021, in the event of a DIIS inspection during which violations in the implementation of a clinical trial are identified, the sponsor or the CRO will be subject to the following sanctions: a warning(s) and a fine for the infraction(s). In addition to the warning(s) and fine, the sponsor will also be required to cancel the trial. See also G-CTFines for additional information on how fines are assessed and graded.

As explained in Res064-2021, once an investigation is initiated, the DIIS’s Clinical Trials Subdirectorate (Subdirección de Ensayos Clínicos) notifies the participant(s) responsible for conducting the trial of the possible sanction(s) and the charges being made. The participant(s) then has five (5) business days from the date of notification to dispute the charges. The Clinical Trials Subdirectorate may subsequently carry out an examination to determine the existence of the liability(ies) subject to sanction within a maximum period of 30 business days. A final instructional report by the Clinical Trials Subdirectorate is prepared within no more than 15 business days and submitted to the DIIS. Once the report is received, within a maximum term of 15 business days, the DIIS decides on the application of the sanction and may order the performance of complementary actions if considered essential to resolving the procedure. Within a term not exceeding 15 business days, the DIIS then issues a resolution that applies the sanction or the decision to archive the procedure and the participant will be notified. The participant has 15 business days to file an appeal to the DIIS which will then be resolved within 30 business days.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

Decree021-2017 and Decree010-2025 state that the sponsor or the CRO is responsible for submitting the required documentation to the INS to request a trial’s suspension or cancellation. Per Decree021-2017, Res655-2019 (amendingDecree021-2017), and Decree010-2025, an application must be submitted that substantiates the reasons for the suspension/cancellation and describes the data obtained until the time of the suspension/cancellation. If applicable, a report on the measures to be adopted with the research participants should also be included per Decree010-2025.

Decree021-2017 and Decree010-2025 also explain that to close a research center participating in a clinical trial the sponsor is required to submit the following documentation to the INS:

Request justifying the reasons for the research center’s closure
Final report from the research center, including all the data obtained up to the time of closure
Report on the measure to be adopted with research participants, if applicable
Decree021-2017 also indicates that a copy of the EC (CIEI) letter of acknowledgment of the approved study must be submitted to the INS.

Refer to PER-43 for the clinical trial research center closure application form, PER-30 for the clinical trial suspension application form, and PER-31 for the clinical trial cancellation request form.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

No information is currently available.

Records Management

As set forth in Decree021-2017, the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) is required to possess a documented monitoring record, including the provision of specially selected and specialized personnel (monitors). Additionally, the sponsor or the CRO is responsible for filing in the country all documentation and data obtained for at least 10 years after the conclusion of the study. After two (2) years, the documentation/data may be filed electronically, after communication with the National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)).

Per Decree021-2017, Peru also complies with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (PER-53), which provides guidance to sponsors on records management. PER-53 further specifies that sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application, until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications, or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of the investigational product’s clinical development. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed.

In addition, PER-53 states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Responsible Parties

Law29733 provides that the “person in charge of the personal data bank” is any natural person, private legal entity, or public entity that, alone or acting in conjunction with another, performs the processing of personal data on behalf of the personal data bank owner. Law1353 and Decree016-2024 modify the definition provided by Law29733 stating that the entity “responsible for processing personal data” is any natural person, private legal entity, or public entity that, alone or acting jointly with another, performs the processing of personal data on behalf of the data controller or personal data bank owner by virtue of a legal relationship that binds him to it and defines the scope of its performance.

RegDir294-2020 (approved by Res688-2020), similarly defines the “holder of the personal data bank” as the natural person, private legal person or public entity, responsible for determining the purpose and content of the personal data bank, its treatment and the security measures. As described in RegDir294-2020, personal data bank holders specifically refer to public, private, or mixed entities in the health sector that are overseen by the Ministry of Health of Peru (Ministerio de Salud del Perú (MINSA)).

As stated in Decree016-2024, which establishes provisions for the proper application of Law29733, and guarantees adequate protection of the fundamental rights of personal data holders, the personal data bank owner or the data controller and the data processor must designate a personal data officer in the following cases:

The processing is carried out by a public entity
Large volumes of personal data are processed, in terms of quantity or type, or that may affect a large number of people, or where sensitive data is involved, or where there is obvious harm to other rights or freedoms of the personal data holder
The primary business activities of the data bank owner, data controller, and data processor involve the processing of sensitive data
Refer to Decree016-2024 and PER-121 for additional personal data officer requirements.

Data Protection

As delineated in Law29733, the person in charge of the personal data bank, is required to protect the confidentiality and background of the personal data holder. This obligation continues even after the conclusion of the relationship between the personal data holder and the person in charge. However, the person in charge of the personal data may be relieved of the obligation to uphold the personal data holder’s confidentiality when there is prior, informed, explicit, and unequivocal consent by the personal data holder, or when there are justifiable reasons related to national defense, public safety, or public health.

According to Law29733, the person in charge of the personal data bank (also referred to as the person in charge of processing personal data, as per Law1353) has the following obligations:

To carry out the processing of personal data, only with prior informed, explicit, and unequivocal consent of the personal data holder
To not collect personal data by fraudulent, unfair, or illegal means
To collect personal data that is updated, necessary, relevant, and adequate, in relation to specific, explicit, and lawful purposes for which the data was obtained
To not use the personal data processed for purposes other than those that motivated its collection, unless there is an anonymization or dissociation procedure
To store personal data in a way that allows the exercise of the personal data holder’s rights
To delete and replace, or where appropriate, correct the personal data subject to processing once aware of its inaccurate or incomplete nature, without prejudice to the rights of the personal data holder in this regard
To delete personal data subject to processing when it is no longer necessary or relevant to the purpose for which it had been collected, or the deadline for its treatment has expired, unless there is an anonymization or dissociation procedure
To provide the National Authority for the Protection of Personal Data with information related to the processing of personal data that it requires, and allow access to the personal data banks that it manages, for the exercise of its functions, within the framework of an administrative procedure in case it is requested by the affected party
Decree019-2017, which regulates the application of Law1353 and strengthens the personal data protection requirements delineated in Law29733, further establishes the terms of personal data protection violations provided in Law29733. Please refer to Decree019-2017 for information on sanctions imposed on personal data violations that include, but are not limited to, failing to treat personal data without the free, express, unequivocal, prior, and informed consent of the personal data holder and conducting sensitive personal data processing in breach of established security measures.

Decree016-2024 also notes that in the event of a personal data security incident, the data bank owner or data controller must notify the National Personal Data Protection Authority no later than 48 hours after becoming aware or obtaining proof of the incident. If notification is made after 48 hours, it must be accompanied by an indication of the reasons and/or supporting evidence for such delay. This obligation remains in place even if the personal data controller determines that the incident has been remedied or resolved internally. The data holder must also be notified within 48 hours, in simple and understandable language, and informed of the measures to be taken to mitigate its effects. If such notification is made after 48 hours, it must be accompanied by an indication of the reasons for such delay.

In addition, the cross-border flow of personal data may only occur when the recipient or importer of the personal data is located in a country that has an adequate level of data protection in accordance with the provisions of Law29733, Law1353, and Decree016-2024. Per Decree016-2024, if the country does not have an adequate level of data protection, the issuer or exporter must provide appropriate guarantees to ensure the proper processing of personal data outside the national territory, except for the exceptions delineated in Law29733.

RegDir294-2020 (as approved by Res686-2020), in turn, establishes administrative criteria for the adequate treatment of personal data related to health or personal data in health in accordance with Law26842, Law29733, and Law27806. Pursuant to RegDir294-2020, MINSA classifies information relating to the problems, situation, or health conditions of the population in the health sector into two (2) categories: Personal Health Data (DPS) or Personal Data related to Health, and Health Information (IS). DPS are those related to the health or disease situation of a person that identifies or makes the person individually identifiable, corresponding to the past, present, or predicted health and disease, physical or mental, of a person, including the degree of disability and their genetic information.

RegDir294-2020 further explains that DPS are generated in any medical or health act, or any health care received in a health facility or outside of it, including the DPS generated in health-related research. DPS also includes information related to the medical act or health information that may affect personal and family privacy or self-image, national security, and foreign relations. When subjected to the proper anonymization and dissociation procedures, DPS become IS, where it is not possible to know the identity of the original DPS holder. In this case, health establishments may transmit health information related to the health of its users. Additionally, information generated from the care of patients in health emergency or pandemic situations, insofar as it corresponds to DPS, must receive the same treatment that DPS receive under normal conditions per the requirements specified in RegDir294-2020. See RegDir294-2020 for more information on the treatment of DPS.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

Prior to the collection of personal data, the entity responsible for processing this data must obtain the data holder’s consent for the collection and use of personal data per the provisions of Law29733, Law1353 (amending Law29733), and Decree016-2024. Consent for the processing of personal data is only valid when the personal data holder provides their free, express, unequivocal, prior, and informed consent.

Law29733, Law1353, and Decree016-2024 further explain that prior to the data collection, the holder of the personal data has the right to be informed of the following information in a detailed, simple, express, and unambiguous manner and in plain language (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The purpose for which the personal data will be processed
Recipient identity
The personal data bank owner’s or the data controller’s identity and address to revoke consent or exercise their rights, and, where applicable, their representative
The existence of the data bank in which the personal data holder’s data will be stored, as well as the identity and address of the data bank owner, and, if applicable, the person in charge of processing the personal data
The obligatory or optional nature of the holder’s answers to the questionnaire that is presented, especially regarding sensitive data
Where applicable, the national and international transfer of personal data
The consequences of the holder providing personal data and the refusal to do so
Retention period for the personal data
The possibility of exercising the rights granted by law and the means provided for it
The existence of automated decisions, including profiling, and the transmission of information regarding the consequences for the personal data holder
Additionally, per Decree016-2024, when the personal data has not been collected directly from the personal data holder, the data bank owner or the responsible person must be able to inform, upon initial contact and at the request of the personal data holder, the source of the collection of the personal data. For the purposes of proving consent, the burden of proof rests in all cases on the personal data bank owner or the data controller.

Law29733, Law1353, and Decree016-2024 also state that in cases involving sensitive data, in addition to meeting the requirements for valid consent, consent must be granted in writing. Decree016-2024 specifies that the personal data holder’s handwritten, digital, or electronic signature, or any other method is required to guarantee the will of the personal data holder. Law29733 and Law1353 also note that even in the absence of the data holder's consent, the processing of sensitive data may be carried out when authorized by law, provided that it serves important reasons of public interest.

Law29733 further specifies that the personal data bank owner, the person in charge, and others involved in any way with processing an individual’s personal data are obligated to protect the confidentiality of the individual’s background and data. This obligation continues even after the conclusion of the relationship between the personal data holder and the entity responsible for the data. However, the person in charge of the personal data may be relieved of the obligation to uphold the personal data holder’s confidentiality when there is prior, informed, explicit, and unequivocal consent by the personal data holder, or when there are justifiable reasons related to national defense, public safety, or public health.

In addition, per RegDir294-2020, the DPS holder’s written consent is required to process their personal data. Further, even when the DPS holder’s consent is not obtained, sensitive data processing can be carried out when authorized by law, provided that it meets important reasons of public health interest. These reasons refer to the exceptional access to the DPS of a person(s), without their consent, when that information is necessary to protect the population. In no case does this exception extend to the entire population or groups of populations, as this would require the written and express consent of each person per Law29733.

RegDir294-2020 further explains that all DPS holders can exercise their rights of access, rectification, cancellation, opposition, right to guardianship, objective, treatment, among others as indicated in Law29733. As long as the DPS holder gives prior and explicit written consent, the public, private, and mixed health sector entities may share the DPS holder’s information. The health sector entities must also designate an area to respond to DPS holder requests to exercise their rights regarding their information. The DPS holders must be provided the appropriate conditions to grant their consent through handwritten or digital signature, or any other authentication instrument that guarantees the DPS holder’s unequivocal will. The DPS holder may revoke consent to the treatment of their DPS at any time, and the health professional or person who treats them must respect their will.

Refer to PER-3 for additional information on Law29733, and PER-101 for information on RegDir294-2020. See PER-122 for details on Decree016-2024.

Consent for Processing Personal Data of Children/Adolescents

As delineated in Decree016-2024, the processing of the personal data of children and adolescents is considered lawful when the consent of the legal representative/guardian, as appropriate, is obtained. Persons over 14 and under 18 years of age, in accordance with their capacity, may grant consent for the processing of their personal data, provided that the information provided has been expressed in a language they understand, in accordance with the regulations on the matter.

In addition, per Decree016-2024, personal data from children and adolescents that would allow information to be obtained about other members of their family group, such as data relating to the professional activity of their parents, economic information, sociological data, or any other information, may not be collected without the consent of the data holders. Identity and address data may only be collected from the legal representative/guardian for the purpose of obtaining consent, where appropriate. It is also the obligation of the personal data bank owners, or the data processor of children and adolescent data, to guarantee the protection of the best interests of the child and their fundamental rights in the digital environment. Within the framework of the provision of digital services for persons over 14 and under 18 years of age, the processing of personal data is lawful when their consent has been obtained. For persons under 14 years of age, the processing of personal data is lawful provided that the consent of the legal representative/guardian, as appropriate, is obtained for the provision of digital services. The personal data bank owner or data processor on platforms or services in the digital environment should also make reasonable efforts to verify the identity of those who grant consent, taking into account the available technology.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Obtaining Consent

In all Peruvian clinical trials, a freely given informed consent must be obtained from each participant in accordance with the principles set forth in Law26842, Decree021-2017, the G-EC-CTRev, and the Declaration of Helsinki (PER-76). Decree011-2011 further states that all scientific and technological research and applications will be developed with respect for the prior, free, express, and informed consent of the person concerned, based on adequate information. Consent in such terms implies the recognition of the patient's right to be treated as a free person and capable of making their own decisions.

Per Decree021-2017 and the G-EC-CTRev, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by an INS-registered institutional ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)) and provided to the INS with the clinical trial application. PER-83 further specifies that the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) must provide copies of the research protocol and ICF that are stamped and signed by the EC in its entirety as evidence that the approved version is being presented. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.)

As delineated in Decree021-2017, Decree027-2015, the G-EC-CTRev, and Res233-2020, investigator(s) must provide detailed research study information to the participant or legal representative/guardian. The ICF content should be presented briefly and clearly in writing, in a manner that is easy to understand, commensurate with the comprehension level of the research participants, and without coercion or unduly influencing a potential participant to enroll in the clinical trial. The participant and the legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate. Per Decree021-2017, when drafting and presenting the ICF, special consideration must be taken with regard to the participant’s culture, traditional values, intelligence, and education.

Res233-2020, which regulates human subjects research other than clinical trials of drugs or devices, states that investigators must also submit any modifications or amendments to the initially approved research project and informed consent processes in a report to the EC in a timely manner, except in cases where these changes are necessary to prevent harm to the research participants when ECs must be informed within 24 hours. Furthermore, participants must be kept constantly informed about the changes, progress, and results of the research according to the applicable regulations.

Re-Consent

As indicated in Decree021-2017, the participant or legal representative/guardian is required to sign a revised ICF if any changes occur in the protocol or in the treatment methods or procedures.

Language Requirements

Per Decree021-2017, the ICF must be written in Spanish and in the language of the research participant.

Documenting Consent

Decree021-2017 and the G-EC-CTRev state that the participant or legal representative/guardian, and the investigator(s) must sign and date the ICF. Where the participant is illiterate or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, a fingerprint will serve as a signature, and should be obtained in the presence of and countersigned by an impartial witness who does not belong to the research team. Before participating in the study, the participant should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF.

Waiver of Consent

No information is available regarding waiver of consent.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

As delineated in Decree021-2017 and the G-EC-CTRev, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Trial title (include version and date)
Sponsor(s), research institution, principal investigator (PI), ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)), and the INS contact information
Explicit invitation to participate in an experimental research study and the voluntary nature of participation
Trial rationale, objectives, and purpose
Trial treatments or interventions
Randomization and blinding procedures
Trial procedures and purpose
Expected duration of research participant’s involvement in the trial
The approximate number of participants in the study
Expected or unforeseeable risks and discomforts arising from the trial
Free treatment and procedures used as part of the trial design
The expected benefits that can be obtained from the study
If there are alternative procedures that could be advantageous to the participant
The commitments assumed by the participant when agreeing to participate in the study
The guarantee of receiving answers to any questions and clarification for any doubts about the procedures, risks, benefits, and other trial related matters and the treatment of the participant
In the event of trial-related injuries, contact information for the PI, the EC president, and the Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS))
Participant’s right to withdraw consent at any time and to stop participating in the study without creating any detriment to continue care and treatment
The participant and/or the legal representative agrees to authorize access to personal data to verify procedures and/or trial data without violating the participant’s confidentiality
The extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained, and the possibility of record access by the INS and the EC
The commitment to provide up-to-date information about the investigational product (IP) or procedure, or when the participant requests this information, although this may affect the participant’s willingness to continue participating
Foreseeable circumstances and/or reasons under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without consent
The requirement that medical treatment and compensation must be provided to the participant in the case of trial-related injuries
Economic compensation for additional expenses (e.g., transportation, accommodation, communication, and food)
Specify when final trial results will be provided to the participant
Inform the participant of post-study access to the IP after trial completion
Provide a trial description in REPEC (PER-89) (also referred to as REPECv2)
Additionally, the G-EC-CTRev states that the participant should be provided with detailed information on the biological samples to be collected and stored. Per Decree021-2017, if biological sample storage and collection is being considered for future use, then this point should be made explicit in an additional ICF. Refer to the Consent for Specimen section for further information on participant consent requirements for use of biological samples.

See also the Vulnerable Populations section for further information.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Overview

In accordance with Law26842, Decree021-2017, the G-EC-CTRev, Res233-2020, the PeruConstitution, Decree011-2011, and the Declaration of Helsinki (PER-76), Peru’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. Per Decree021-2017, the G-EC-CTRev, and Res233-2020, a participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

Decree021-2017, Decree027-2015, and the G-EC-CTRev state that the participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that study withdrawal may occur at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As explained in Decree021-2017, Decree027-2015, and the G-EC-CTRev, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

Pursuant to Decree021-2017 and the G-EC-CTRev, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. The ICF must also incorporate the following items related to privacy:

Data the participant will have access to and what information will be collected
How collected data will be used, stored, and protected, and who will have access
That representatives of the sponsor, ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)), and the INS will have access to the data
How biological data and samples are handled if consent is withdrawn
That participants’ data will be de-identified in the case of publications and presentations of the clinical trial results
The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

Per Decree021-2017 and the G-EC-CTRev, the research participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries and/or to appeal against a violation of the participant's rights.

The ICF must guarantee that the participant will receive answers to any questions and clarification to any doubts about the procedures, risks, benefits, and other matters related to the clinical trial and the treatment of the participant. There must also be a commitment to provide up-to-date information about the product or procedure under investigation when the participant requests it.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

Decree021-2017, the G-EC-CTRev, and Decree011-2011 indicate that the research participant’s dignity, safety, and welfare must be guaranteed while ensuring the quality of the research process in developing new products. The G-EC-CTRev further states that the interests of science cannot take precedence over the interests of the research participants.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
No information is currently available.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Overview

As per Decree021-2017, in all Peruvian clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. Additionally, the G-EC-CTRev specifies that the ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)) should identify the vulnerabilities of the research participants to determine the additional protections required and to protect their welfare and rights.

Decree021-2017 defines vulnerable populations as those who are relatively (or absolutely) incapable of protecting their own interests due to a lack of autonomy, intelligence, education, resources, strength, or other necessary attributes. This may include those in subordinate groups, indigenous or native peoples, and those who cannot give their consent. In addition, per Decree011-2011, in the case of individuals who do not have the capacity to exercise their autonomy, measures will be taken to safeguard their rights, always ensuring what is most favorable to them. The protection of human life considers the protection of health, as well as taking into account vulnerability and personal integrity. Decree011-2011 further explains that the cultural and plural diversities of Peru cannot represent a justification for transgressing legitimate limits established by the recognition of the principle of respect for human dignity.

See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations. Information on the other vulnerable populations specified in Decree021-2017 is provided below.

Indigenous Peoples

As explained in Decree021-2017, clinical trials involving participants from indigenous communities may only be conducted under the following conditions:

When the expected benefit is reasonably assured; that is, when the product or knowledge generated by research is available or applied for the benefit of the community
The principal investigator (PI) has the approval to conduct the trial from the regional health authority and other authorities in the community, in addition to obtaining informed consent from trial participants
Sponsors and investigators develop culturally appropriate ways through working with anthropologists, sociologists, and translators to communicate the necessary information, and to meet the standards required in the informed consent process. In addition, the research protocol must describe and justify the methods the investigators plan to use to communicate information to research participants
Investigators agree to discontinue using individual participants when the community does not have the capacity to understand the implications of the participants’ involvement in the trial, despite the use of a translator or interpreter
In the case of including biological storage samples, it must have the authorization of the corresponding regional and local government, and of the respective community authorities, who must consider the interest of the community involved
The G-EC-CTRev further notes that the EC should ensure it has adopted all the appropriate measures when running a clinical trial in a community to minimize the potentially negative effects on the group and to ensure the community’s active involvement in the trial. The G-EC-CTRev also references Decree021-2017’s provision pertaining to indigenous communities, which requires approval by the community’s authorities to conduct the study prior to obtaining individual informed consent. However, approval by the community authorities may not replace the consent of each individual research participant within the group.

Persons in Dependent Groups

Per Decree021-2017, clinical trials involving participants in subordinate or dependent relationships must meet the following requirements:

One (1) or more of the EC’s members must represent the population under study or work with someone who has expertise in addressing social, cultural, and other issues related to the group in question
Refusal or withdrawal of consent during the trial should not affect a participant’s performance review or result in any negative consequences to the participant
These relationships include participants who are in junior or subordinate positions in hierarchically structured groups, such as students and teachers, employees and their supervisors, and soldiers and their superiors in military settings.

Persons with Physical Disabilities

Per Decree021-2017 and Decree021-2017-Correct, in clinical trials involving participants with physical disabilities that prevent them from signing the informed consent form (ICF), but with the mental capacity to provide their consent, their legal representative(s) may grant their written consent by printing their fingerprint. This consent must be provided in the presence of at least one (1) witness designated by the participant that does not belong to the research team, and who in turn will sign the ICF. If the participant is unable to sign or provide a fingerprint, another means may be used that the participant approves. In this case, the legal representative(s) are required to sign the ICF with a witness present who is not a member of the research team. The participant and/or the legal representative(s) may withdraw consent at any time without negative consequences as long as the withdrawal does not jeopardize the participant’s health.

Additionally, in the case of participants who, due to disabilities, are unable to give their informed consent and have not given consent prior to the onset of their disability, the following provisions must be met:

The informed consent must comply with the requirements delineated in the Required Elements section
The protocol must be approved by an EC that has experts in the disease under study, or has consulted on the clinical, ethical, and psycho-social aspects in the area of the disease and the group of patients affected
The G-EC-CTRev also notes that, per Law1384 which amends Law295, persons with disabilities have an equal capacity to exercise their rights in all aspects of life, including the right to choose to be a participant in a research study with the support of a legal representative(s), if applicable. In addition, Law1384 states that any person with a disability that requires reasonable adjustments or support to exercise their legal rights may request or designate a legal representative(s) of their choosing for assistance. Persons with disabilities who cannot communicate their own wishes will receive support and safeguards from judicially designated entities.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Pursuant to Law27337, Law295, Law1384, and the G-EC-CTRev, the age of majority is 18 years of age. Per Law295 and the G-EC-CTRev, children under 16 are considered to be absolutely incapable of providing consent, except for those acts determined by law. Individuals who are over 16 and under 18 are considered to be relatively incapable of providing consent. However, individuals older than 16, who are married, or have obtained an official title authorizing them to practice a profession or trade, are exempt from this regulation. Per Law295 and Law1384, females over 14 who are married are also exempt from this regulation. If a marriage is terminated, individuals who acquire this capacity by marriage do not lose this right. Law1384 further clarifies that individuals over 14 and under 18 who marry, or who become parents are considered fully capable of providing consent.

Per Decree021-2017, for studies involving minors, an ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)) that has a specialist in pediatrics, or has obtained advice on the clinical, ethical, and psycho-social aspects of the trial from a pediatric expert, if applicable, must approve the protocol.

Assent Requirements

Per Decree021-2017 and the G-EC-CTRev, the assent of a pediatric participant from the age of eight (8) and under 18 years of age must be obtained to participate in an investigation.

In addition to a minor providing assent, Decree021-2017 and the G-EC-CTRev state that the consent of both parents or the minor’s legal guardian is required. Per Decree021-2017, the consent of the legal guardian may only be dismissed in the case of death, loss of rights according to Decree requirements, or proven impossibility to obtain consent has been documented appropriately. In the event that one (1) parent is a minor, the consent of the direct ascendant relative is also required unless the parent is a minor of 16 years of age or more, the participant has gotten married, or has obtained an official professional or trade title as earlier noted per Law295.

Decree021-2017 further explains that all pediatric participants should be fully informed about the trial and its risks and benefits in language and terms that they are easily able to understand. The investigator(s) must also accept the withdrawal of informed consent at the request of the child’s legal guardian at any time, provided that the child’s health will not be jeopardized. A minor who is a teenager must also be excluded from a trial when a conflict of views exists between the legal guardian and the teenager. A minor who reaches the age of majority during a trial must provide consent before continuing to participate in the study.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
As per Decree021-2017, studies involving women of childbearing age or who are pregnant require additional safeguards to ensure that the research assesses the risks and benefits as well as any potential impact on fertility, pregnancy, the embryo or fetus, labor, lactation, and the newborn.

Clinical trials may only be conducted under the following conditions:

The informed consent of the woman and her spouse or partner is obtained, and they are given information about any potential risks to the embryo, fetus, or newborn prior to the trial
The spouse’s or partner’s consent may only be dismissed in the case of death; their inability to provide reliable consent; loss of rights; or when there is imminent risk to the health or life of the woman or the embryo, fetus, or newborn
Informed consent may be withdrawn by the woman or spouse’s or partner’s request at any time, without detriment to them, provided the woman or fetus is not endangered
The research must be preceded by trials in non-pregnant women to demonstrate their safety, except for specific tests that require pregnant participants
The research must be aimed at improving the health of pregnant women and represent only a minimal risk to the embryo or fetus and the participant
During the study, investigators will not have the authority to decide on the timing, method, or procedure used to terminate the pregnancy, or to participate in decisions about the viability of the fetus
Informed consent for pregnant teenagers complies with the requirements stated in the Children/Minors section
Clinical trials may only be carried out in women in labor, postpartum, or breastfeeding when the following conditions are met:

Consent must be obtained before labor starts
Research will be authorized in postpartum women and breastfeeding only when there is minimal risk to the infant
Informed consent may be withdrawn at the request of the participant, spouse, or partner at any time, without detriment to them, provided they do not affect or endanger the mother or the fetus or infant
The clinical trial has the potential to generate direct benefits greater than the risks to the nursing woman or child after birth
See Title III (Article 23) of Decree021-2017, for additional details on embryos, fetuses, and newborns.

Research Involving Men and Women with Reproductive Capacity

Per Decree021-2017, clinical trials involving men and women with reproductive capacity are only permitted under the following conditions:

For women, the principal investigator (PI) must conduct a pregnancy test to rule out any pregnancies, and to secure commitment from the women to use effective contraceptive methods. The sponsor will provide free access and a list of contraceptive methods to the participant(s) to be selected by the participant(s) and consistent with the trial
In the event of pregnancy during the study, the protocol should establish the exclusion of the mother; the application of procedures to monitor and control the pregnancy as well as monitoring and control of the newborn until at least six (6) months of age to identify any effects related to the investigational product
For men, the PI must secure a commitment from the men to prevent conception, and to use effective contraceptive methods to be provided free of charge to the participant(s) by the PI/sponsor, as specified in the protocol and the informed consent form
Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
No information is currently available.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Law30947 establishes a legal framework that guarantees access to services, promotion, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation in mental health as conditions for the full exercise of the right to health and well-being of the person, the family, and the community. The law states that mental health care takes into account the model of community care as well as respect for human rights and the dignity of the individual, without discrimination and using the intercultural approach, which eliminates the stigmatization of people with mental health problems. Some of the principles addressed in Law30947 specifically applicable to ensuring consent in this vulnerable population include:

Confidentiality – Mental health care guarantees the confidentiality of information obtained in the clinical context. The disclosure, examination, or release of medical records without the express consent of the individuals involved, or if applicable, the consent of their legal representative(s), is prohibited
Dignity – Care and treatment of an individual with mental health issues is based on protecting and promoting the dignity of an individual through the recognition of fundamental rights
Human rights – The therapeutic, prophylactic, and promotional strategies, actions, and interventions in mental health matters must comply with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) (PER-54) and other international and regional human rights instruments to which Peru is a party
Law30947 defines a representative as a person who, according to law, gives consent for the treatment of the mental health problems of children and adolescents. In the treatment of psychiatric disorders, mental health services also consider the special needs of the population in vulnerable situations and prioritizes mental health care in vulnerable populations including early childhood, adolescence, women, and older adults.

Per Law30947, some, but not all, of the rights of users of mental health services related to consent are listed below:

To receive complete, timely, and ongoing information about their mental health status, in understandable terms, including diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment alternatives; as well as the risks, contraindications, precautions, and warnings of the interventions, treatments, and medications that are prescribed and administered
To be informed of their right to refuse to receive or to continue treatment, and to explain the consequences of that refusal
To authorize or not the presence of people who are not directly related to medical care, at the time of the evaluations
To allow their consent to be in writing when they are the subject of investigation for the application of medications or treatments
To choose not to receive a contraception method without prior informed consent, and to be obtained by the individual when not in a crisis due to the diagnosed mental health problem
To not be discriminated against or be stigmatized for having or for suffering from, permanently or temporarily, a mental health problem
To be treated with respect in regard to their dignity, autonomy, and needs, in accordance with the provisions of the CRPD
In addition, Law295 further states that individuals who for any reason are deprived of discernment, are considered to be absolutely incapable of giving consent. Individuals who suffer from mental deterioration that prevents them from expressing their free will are considered to be relatively incapable of giving consent.

The G-EC-CTRev specifies that persons who are temporarily mentally incapacitated may participate in a research study if their designated legal representative/guardian decides on their behalf to allow them to participate per the requirements specified in Law1384, which amends Law295. The legal representative/guardian should be over 18 years of age. When no support has been designated and there is no representation for a mentally incapacitated person, the decision regarding participation in a clinical trial will be made by the person’s legal representative/guardian in accordance with the consanguinity or affinity ties delineated in Decree027-2015. See Law1384 and Decree027-2015 for requirements related to the roles and responsibilities of the legal representative/guardian.

Decree021-2017, in turn, indicates that the following conditions must be met for clinical trials involving participants who are mentally incapable of giving consent:

Informed consent must be obtained from the legal representative/guardian who has been informed of the possible risks, discomforts, and benefits of the trial
Informed consent may be obtained after the participant has been fully informed about the trial in easily understandable language
Consent may be withdrawn at any time without harm to the participant or legal representative/guardian
As delineated in the G-EC-CTRev, persons in a comatose state may be involved in a clinical study as long as the appropriate legal representative/guardian is in place that complies with Law1384, which amends Law295. According to Law1384, any legal representative/guardian designated prior to a person becoming comatose will be upheld. However, for those persons who have not designated a legal representative/guardian, a judge shall designate the necessary supports and safeguards. This measure will only be taken after efforts have been made to obtain the person’s consent and when the designation of a legal representative/guardian is necessary for the exercise and protection of the participant's rights.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

As delineated in Decree021-2017 and the G-SafeRpt, an investigational product (IP) is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active substance or placebo, being tested or used as an active comparator in a clinical trial. This includes a product with a marketing authorization when it is used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form, when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Decree021-2017 also defines a placebo as a product with a pharmaceutical form, with no active ingredient, and therefore devoid of specific pharmacological action, which may be used as a control in the clinical trial or for maintaining blinding.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Manufacturing

According to Decree021-2017, Decree016-2011, the INS-CTManual, and Res252-2022 (amending the INS-CTManual), the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) must obtain approval from the National Authority for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Medical Products (la Autoridad Nacional de Productos Farmacéuticos, Dispositivos Médicos y Productos Sanitarios (ANM)) to manufacture investigational products (IPs) exclusively for research purposes in Peru. Decree021-2017 states that the manufacture of IPs in the country will be subject to Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) and other regulations issued by the Ministry of Health of Peru (Ministerio de Salud del Perú (MINSA)). Decree016-2011 further specifies that the national manufacture of pharmaceutical products for research purposes involving human beings must be carried out in pharmaceutical establishments that have a sanitary authorization and a GMP certificate, as appropriate. Refer to Decree016-2011 for detailed ANM pharmaceutical manufacturing requirements. (Note: The ANM is also referred to as the General Directorate of Medicines, Supplies and Drugs (La Dirección General de Medicamentos Insumos y Drogas (DIGEMID)) (PER-109)).

Import

As delineated in Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, and Res252-2022, to obtain clinical trial authorization, the National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS))’s Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)) requires the sponsor or the CRO to provide a list of products and supplies necessary for the development of the clinical trial using form FOR-DIIS-033 (PER-42). This form requires the sponsor or the CRO to provide the following data:

Name of product
Active ingredient(s)
Route of administration
Pharmaceutical form and concentration
Manufacturer name
Country of origin
Quantity
Lot number or coding system
Decree021-2017 and Decree016-2011 also specifies that the ANM will authorize the import of IPs exclusively for research involving humans when the applicant can provide information to support the product’s safety and quality according to the stage and type of research being conducted. Documentation requirements for ANM’s approval are as follows:

Application for authorization to import the product(s) under investigation and complementary products
Copy of INS clinical trial approval
List of INS-approved research products, complementary products, and supplies to be used in the trial (see form FOR-DIIS-033 (PER-42))
Proof of payment for processing fee
Decree021-2017 specifies that the ANM will grant this authorization within three (3) business days of filing the application.

See Scope of Assessment section for additional information on the ANM’s role in the clinical trial application approval process, and Annex 1 in Res252-2022 for a flowchart delineating the clinical trial authorization process.

In addition, per Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, and Res252-2022, the sponsor or the CRO must apply to the DIIS using PER-117 to expand or modify the list of supplies to be imported. Per the INS-CTManual, the INS approval process will be completed within a maximum of 10 business days.

According to Decree021-2017, the following documents must be submitted:

Request for expansion or modification of the list of supplies (see form FOR-DIIS-033 PER-117))
Report justifying the reasons for the expansion or modification of the list of supplies
Additional or modified detailed list of supplies necessary for the trial’s execution
The INS-CTManual further explains that in addition to submitting PER-117 and a report justifying the reasons for the amended supply list request, the following should be provided:

To modify by the batch number: Certificate of analysis and IP labeling
To modify by the manufacturer or country: GMP Certificate, Certificate of analysis, and IP labeling
In addition, to submit a request to expand the list of supplies (see PER-117), PER-116 indicates that a letter should be provided to the DIIS Director General with the following:

The reason for this request (detailing why and for what purpose the product is needed; in case of an increase in the initially approved quantity, it is essential to provide calculations of the estimates that need to be imported)
The insurance policy effective date
If the list is expanded due to an amendment to the informed consent or research protocol, the date of an institutional ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)) authorization of said amendment should be indicated
Clean version of PER-42
Change control version of PER-42 (modified items must be underlined and with a different color or highlighted)
To submit a request to modify the list of supplies (see PER-117), PER-116 states that the letter to the DIIS Director General should also include the following:

The reason for this request (detailing why the modification is needed and for what purpose)
The insurance policy effective date
Clean version of PER-42
Change control version of PER-42 (modified items must be underlined and with a different color or highlighted). If the batch number is modified, the batch number release analysis certificate and the labeling project must be attached. If the manufacturer or the country of origin is modified, the GMP certificate must also be attached.
See PER-42 for the form to list the supplies to be imported, PER-116 for the form letters, PER-117 for the form to expand or modify the list of supplies, and the INS-CTManual for detailed instructions on completing these forms.

Please note: Peru is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (PER-11), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see PER-57.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

Investigator’s Brochure

In accordance with Decree021-2017, Res655-2019 (amending Decree021-2017), and Res252-2022 (amending the INS-CTManual), the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for providing the investigators with an Investigator’s Brochure (IB). The IB must contain all of the relevant information on the investigational product(s) (IPs) obtained through the earlier research phases, including preclinical, toxicological, safety, efficacy, and adverse events (AEs) data. As noted in Decree021-2017, the IB must be validated and updated on a regular basis by the sponsor and at least once a year by the responsible team member (if not the sponsor), when new information on the IP—not yet included in the IB—becomes available. Decree021-2017 and the INS-CTManual indicate that the updated IB should be sent to the INS’s Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)), the ethics committees (ECs), and the principal investigators (PIs). The INS-CTManual further specifies that the sponsor or the CRO is required to submit a signed notification form (FOR-DIIS-059) to inform the DIIS of any IB updates (PER-41). The form must be accompanied by an updated report of the applicable IP(s).

As specified in Decree021-2017, the IB must provide coverage of the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation parameters
Non-clinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Clinical studies (pharmacokinetics, metabolism, pharmacodynamics, dose response safety, efficacy, and other pharmacological activities; safety and efficiency)
Post-marketing experience (e.g., countries where the IP has been marketed or approved or did not receive approval/registration, was withdrawn, or registration was suspended; any significant information arising from marketed use; potential risks and adverse reactions)
Publication and report references
See Annex 2 of Decree021-2017 for detailed content guidelines.

In addition, per the G-SafeRpt, the sponsor or the CRO must ensure that the IB specifies and lists the AEs observed with the IP and for which there is a confirmed or suspected causal relationship. Refer to the G-SafeRpt for detailed safety information to include in the IB.

Quality Management

As specified in Decree021-2017, Res655-2019, and the INS-CTManual, the INS requires the National Authority for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Medical Products (la Autoridad Nacional de Productos Farmacéuticos, Dispositivos Médicos y Productos Sanitarios (ANM) to assess the safety and quality of the IP to be used in a clinical trial as part of its application review and approval process. The ANM's evaluation is based on its review of the IB, the research protocol, and the information related to the IP quality per Annex 2 of Decree021-2017. (Note: The ANM is also referred to as the General Directorate of Medicines, Supplies and Drugs (La Dirección General de Medicamentos Insumos y Drogas (DIGEMID)) (PER-109)). Additionally, to obtain trial authorization, per Decree021-2017, the INS-CTManual, and Res252-2022, the sponsor or the CRO is required to provide quality information regarding the IP in compliance with the requirements in Annex 5 of Decree021-2017. As specified in Annex 5, the following documents relating to the IP must be submitted:

Labeling information
Certificate of batch release analysis or documents that include technical specifications of the batch/series result of the finished product
Accelerated or long-term stability studies as appropriate
Current certificate of the good manufacturing practices of the IP manufacturer, issued by the competent authority of the country of origin or document that guarantees its compliance
For detailed information on submission requirements for comparator IPs and complementary products, refer to Annex 5 of Decree021-2017.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Peru must comply with the requirements set forth in Decree021-2017. Labels for IPs used in a clinical trial must be written in Spanish or English language and printed in indelible ink.

In addition, the following information must be included as a minimum on the product label:

Name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor or contract research organization (CRO)
Trial number and/or trial title
IP name or unique code
Date of IP’s expiration or reanalysis
Manufacturing lot number
Number of units and pharmaceutical form
Route of administration
Special storage and conservation requirements
“For research use only”, “no sale”, or similar wording indicating the IP is clinical trial material
The inner labeling of the IP should contain:

IP name
Active ingredient concentration
Route of administration
Manufacturer's name or logo
Batch number and expiration date
In double-blind trials where the IP character, lot number, and manufacturer’s name are not included on the label, the package must include a document that links to information that identifies possible blinded treatments. Furthermore, the labeling must indicate the most restrictive storage requirements on both products. (See the Product Management section for additional information on IP supply, storage, and handling requirements).

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

Per PER-53, the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) should supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the investigational products (IPs). Decree021-2017 indicates that the IPs will be dispensed through a Clinical Trials Dispensing Unit under the Pharmacy Service or Department of the research institution where the trial will be conducted. The dispensation process must comply with the G-GSPs and G-GDPs, and study specifications delineated by the sponsor. The Clinical Trial Dispensing unit is responsible for:

Conducting an inventory of the IPs
Controlling overused, used, and unused IPs for final disposal as established in the protocol
See also Res833-2024 for regulatory requirements and technical criteria related to the implementation and operation of Clinical Trials Dispensing Units.

Decree021-2017 further indicates that the sponsor or the CRO is responsible for the destruction of the unused and/or returned IPs. The IPs should not be destroyed without the sponsor’s or the CRO’s prior written authorization, and any discrepancy in their final accounting has been investigated, explained, and resolved. The destruction of the IPs will be carried out in the presence of a notary public, with the approval of the National Authority for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Medical Products (la Autoridad Nacional de Productos Farmacéuticos, Dispositivos Médicos y Productos Sanitarios (ANM) and the National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS))’s Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (Dirección de Investigación e Innovación en Salud (DIIS)). The unused and/or returned complementary products may be destroyed, returned to the country of origin, or donated, and the ANM must be provided with proof of this action. See also PER-41 for the notification form (FOR-DIIS-059) to dispose of IPs. (Note: The ANM is also referred to as the General Directorate of Medicines, Supplies and Drugs (La Dirección General de Medicamentos Insumos y Drogas (DIGEMID)) (PER-109)).

Additionally, per Decree021-2017, unused and/or returned IPs will be exempt from destruction requirements if post-study access to research participants is planned. See the Insurance & Compensation section for additional information on participant post-trial access to IPs. Refer to Decree021-2017 for additional IP and complementary product destruction requirements.

Record Requirements

Per Decree021-2017, the sponsor must also keep samples of the IPs, its manufacturing and control protocols, as well as IP records. In addition, all IP destruction procedures must be documented. The records must detail the quantities destroyed and allow the traceability of the IP.

Decree021-2017 further states that the Clinical Trials Dispensing Unit or the Pharmacy Service or Department of the research institution where the trial will be conducted is also responsible for maintaining a record of dates in which IP quantities are received/dispensed.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
No relevant provisions are currently available that define specimens.

However, as noted in Decree021-2017, standards relating to biological samples to be used in clinical trials will be approved in a forthcoming National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) resolution.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
No relevant provisions are currently available regarding the import or export of specimens.

However, as noted in Decree021-2017, standards relating to biological samples to be used in clinical trials will be approved in a forthcoming National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) resolution.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 14, 2025
Note: The Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (Registro Peruano de Ensayos Clínicos (REPEC)) websites (https://ensayosclinicos-repec.ins.gob.pe and https://repec.ins.gob.pe), and ClinRegs sources directly linked to these sites are not accessible to users outside of Peru. For a comprehensive and updated list of procedural forms, see Res435-2024. See also PER-125 for additional National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) clinical trial regulatory information.

In accordance with Decree021-2017, if a clinical trial team is considering the collection and storage of biological samples for future use, this point should be delineated explicitly in a separate informed consent form (ICF).

Annex 4 of Decree021-2017 and the G-EC-CTRev also state that the ICF must list the following biological sample study procedures:

Sample collection details: type, quantity, and number of times to be extracted; explaining how many times and how much is needed, in measures that the research participant understands
Final destination of remaining samples: stating explicitly that the samples obtained will be used only for ongoing research, and will be destroyed when the trial is completed, unless storage is contemplated for future use
Sample storage or their remainders for future studies: if stock samples are to be stored beyond the end of the trial and/or biological samples are to be taken for storage and future studies, it should be incorporated into a specific ICF for that end
Per the G-EC-CTRev, donors of biological samples and related data must give their consent (either specific or broad) to authorize the future use of their samples. The ethics committee (EC) (El Comité Institucional de Ética en Investigación (CIEI)) responsible for reviewing the associated research protocol must verify that the proposed uses of the donor samples are within the scope of authorization that the donor agreed to in the ICF.

In addition, Annex 4 of Decree021-2017 and the G-EC-CTRev specify that in the event a research participant withdraws their informed consent, the ICF must explain how the participant’s rights to privacy and confidentiality in the handling of their biological data and samples will be upheld.

Further, as set forth in Decree021-2017, when a clinical trial is to be conducted in indigenous peoples in Peru and the storage of biological samples is being considered, authorization must be obtained from the corresponding regional and local government, and of the respective community authorities, who must consider the interest of the community involved.

Per Law27337, children and adolescents are also guaranteed protection from experiments or genetic manipulations contrary to their integrity and their physical or mental development.

As noted in Decree021-2017, standards relating to biological samples to be used in clinical trials will be approved in a forthcoming National Institute of Health (Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS)) resolution.

Requirements
(Legislation) Law No. 26842 - General Health Law (Law26842 - Spanish) (English-Law26842 – Google Translate) (Effective January 5, 1998)
Congress of the Republic
(Legislation) Law No. 27337 - Law that Approves the New Code of Children and Adolescents (Law27337 - Spanish) (English-Law27337 – Google Translation) (Effective August 2, 2000)
Congress of the Republic
(Legislation) Law No. 27444 - General Administrative Procedure Law (Law27444 - Spanish) (English-Law27444 – Google Translation) (Effective April 10, 2001)
Congress of the Republic
(Legislation) Law No. 27657 - Law of the Ministry of Health (Law27657 - Spanish) (English-Law27657 – Google Translation) (Effective January 28, 2002)
Congress of the Republic
(Legislation) Law No. 29459 - Law on Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Health Products (Law29459 - Spanish) (Effective November 25, 2009)
Congress of the Republic
(Legislation) Law No. 29733 - Personal Data Protection Law (Law29733 - Spanish) (English-Law29733 – Google Translation) (Effective July 3, 2011)
Congress of the Republic
(Legislation) Law No. 30947 - Mental Health Law (Law30947 - Spanish) (English-Law30947 – Google Translation) (Effective May 23, 2019)
Congress of the Republic
(Legislation) Legislative Decree No. 1353 - Creates the National Authority for Transparency and Access to Public Information, Strengthens the Personal Data Protection Regime and the Regulation of Interest Management (Law1353 - Spanish) (English-Law1353 – Google Translation) (January 07, 2017) (Updated September 28, 2018)
Congress of the Republic
(Legislation) Legislative Decree No. 1384 - Recognizing and Regulating the Legal Capacity of Persons with Disabilities in Equal Conditions (Law1384 - Spanish) (September 3, 2018)
Congress of the Republic
(Legislation) Legislative Decree No. 1452 - Modifies the Law No. 27444, General Administrative Procedure Law (Law1452 - Spanish) (English-Law1452 – Google Translation) (September 16, 2018)
Congress of the Republic
(Legislation) Legislative Decree No. 295 - Civil Code (Law295 - Spanish) (Effective November 14, 1984)
Congress of the Republic
(Legislation) Political Constitution of Peru of 1993 (PeruConstitution - Spanish) (English-PeruConstitution – Google Translation) (Amended through March 2019)
Congress of the Republic
(Legislation) Supreme Decree No. 021-2019-JUS – Consolidated Text of Law No. 27806, Law on Transparency and Access to Public Information (Law27806 - Spanish) (English-Law27806 – Google Translation) (Effective December 11, 2019)
Congress of the Republic
(Regulation) Administrative Directive No. 294-MINSA/2020/OGTI - Establishing the Treatment of Personal Data Related to Health or Personal Data in Health (RegDir294-2020 - Spanish) (English-RegDir294-2020 – Google Translation) (October 2020)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Corrections - Supreme Decree No. 021-2017-SA - Clinical Trials Regulation (Decree021-2017-Correct - Spanish) (English-Decree021-2017-Correct – Google Translation) (Effective July 12, 2017)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Directorial Resolution No. 0423-2019-OGITT/INS - Provides for the Amendment of Administrative Procedure Requirements Specified in the Supreme Decree No. 021-2017-SA by the National Institute of Health (INS) for the Authorization of Clinical Trials (Res0423-2019 - Spanish) (September 24, 2019)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Directorial Resolution No. 085-2025-DIIS/INS (Res085-2025 - Spanish) (February 13, 2025)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Directorial Resolution No. 090-2025-DIIS/INS (Res090-2025 - Spanish) (February 20, 2025)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Directorial Resolution No. 184-2023-DIIS/INS – Approval of the List of Exhaustive and Non-Substantial Assumptions that are Considered Minor Changes to the Protocol and/or Informed Consent (Res184-2023 - Spanish) (October 27, 2023)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Directorial Resolution No. 393-2021-OGITT-INS – Approves FOR-OGITT-020 - Sponsor Registration, Edition 02 (Res393-2021 - Spanish) (September 30, 2021)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Directorial Resolution No. 435-2024-DIIS/INS (Res435-2024 - Spanish) (English-Res435-2024 – Google Translation) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Executive Presidency Resolution No. 006-2023-PE/INS – Approval of the Integrated Text of the Regulations on the Organization and Functions of the National Institute of Health (INS) (Res006-2023 - Spanish) (June 22, 2023)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Headquarters Resolution No. 064-2021-J-OPE/INS - Approves Procedure for the Application of Sanctions in the Regulatory Framework of Clinical Trials (Res064-2021 - Spanish) (March 23, 2021)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Headquarters Resolution No. 252-2022-J-OPE/INS - Approves the Clinical Trial Authorization Procedure (Res252-2022 - Spanish) (November 25, 2022)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Ministerial Resolution No. 233-2020-MINSA - Ethical Considerations for Health Research with Human Beings (Res233-2020 - Spanish) (April 28, 2020)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Ministerial Resolution No. 546-2011/MINSA - Technical Health Standard: Categories of Health Sector Establishments (Res546-2011 - Spanish) (July 13, 2011)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Ministerial Resolution No. 655-2019/MINSA - Provides for the Elimination of Administrative Procedure Requirements Specified in the Supreme Decree No. 021-2017-SA by the National Institute of Health (INS) (Res655-2019 - Spanish) (July 27, 2019)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Ministerial Resolution No. 686-2020/MINSA - Technical Health Standard for the Research and Development of Vaccines against Infectious Diseases (Res686-2020 - Spanish) (September 1, 2020)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Ministerial Resolution No. 688-2020/MINSA - Approves the Administrative Directive Establishing the Processing of Personal Data Related to Health or Personal Health (Res688-2020 - Spanish) (September 1, 2020)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Ministerial Resolution No. 833-2024-MINSA (Res833-2024 - Spanish) (Effective August 21, 2025)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Supreme Decree No. 001-2003-SA: Approves the Regulations for the Organization and Functions of the National Institute of Health (Decree001-2003 - Spanish) (English-Decree001-2003 – Google Translation) (January 9, 2003)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Supreme Decree No. 004-2019-JUS - Approves the Consolidated Text of Law No. 27444 - Law of General Administrative Procedure (Decree004-2019 - Spanish) (English-Decree004-2019 – Google Translation) (Effective July 24, 2019)
Ministry of Labor and Employment Promotion
(Regulation) Supreme Decree No. 010-2025-SA - Approves the Consolidated Text of Administrative Procedures (TUPA) of the National Institute of Health (INS) (Decree010-2025 - Spanish) (English-Decree010-2025 – Google Translation) (July 2, 2025)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Supreme Decree No. 011-2011-JUS - Guidelines to Guarantee the Implementation of Bioethics to Ensure the Protection of the Human Rights (Decree011-2011 - Spanish) (July 27, 2011)
Ministry of Justice and Human Rights
(Regulation) Supreme Decree No. 016-2011-SA - Approves the Regulations for the Registration, Control, and Health Monitoring of Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices, and Health Products (Decree016-2011 - Spanish) (July 27, 2011)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Supreme Decree No. 016-2024-JUS - Approves the Regulation of Law 29733, Personal Data Protection Law (Decree016-2024 - Spanish) (English-Decree016-2024 – Google Translation) (Effective March 30, 2025)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Supreme Decree No. 019-2017-JUS - Regulations of Legislative Decree No. 1353 - Creates the National Authority for Transparency and Access to Public Information, Strengthens the Personal Data Protection Regime, and the Regulation of Interest Management (Decree019-2017 - Spanish) (English-Decree019-2017 – Google Translation) (September 15, 2017)
National Authority for Transparency and Access to Public Information
(Regulation) Supreme Decree No. 021-2017-SA: Approval of Clinical Trials Regulation (Decree021-2017 - Spanish) (English-Decree021-2017 – Google Translation) (June 30, 2017)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Supreme Decree No. 027-2015-SA - Regulations for Law No. 29414 – Approves the Law Establishing the Rights of Users of Health Services (Decree027-2015 - Spanish) (English-Decree027-2015 – Google Translation) (August 13, 2015)
Ministry of Health, Ministry of Labor and Employment Promotion, Ministry of Defense, and Ministry of Interior
(Regulation) Supreme Decree No. 028-2023-SA - Decree that Modifies and Incorporates Various Articles in the Clinical Trials Regulation, Approved by Supreme Decree No. 021-2017-SA (Decree028-2023 - Spanish) (English-Decree028-2023 – Google Translation) (October 18, 2023)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Annex 02: Guide for Reporting Clinical Trial Results and Conclusions (G-CTReptReslts - Spanish) (March 14, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Guidance) External User’s Guide for Safety Reporting in Clinical Trials (G-SafeRpt - Spanish) (English-G-SafeRpt – Unofficial Translation) (Edition No. 01) (March 22, 2019)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Guidance) Guide for Inspections of Clinical Trials (G-CTInspec - Spanish) (English-G-CTInspec – Unofficial Translation) (April 30, 2019)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Guidance) Guide for the Ethical Review of Clinical Trials by Institutional Research Ethics Committees (G-EC-CTRev - Spanish) (Edition No. 1) (January 8, 2020)
Executive Office of Research, General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Guidance) Manual of Clinical Trials Procedures (MAN-INS-001) (INS-CTManual - Spanish) (3rd Edition) (November 17, 2017)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Manual of Good Dispensing Practices (G-GDPs - Spanish) (English-G-GDPs – Google Translation) (December 1, 2017)
Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Methodological Guide for Grading Fines for Non-Compliance with the Clinical Trials Regulation (G-CTFines - Spanish) (English-G-CTFines - Google Translation) (January 30, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Procedure for the Management of Safety Information in Authorized Clinical Trials (G-CTSafety - Spanish) (Edition No. 1) (January 11, 2021)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Procedure for the Use of the Virtual Submission Platform at the National Institute of Health (G-VirtSubPlatfrm - Spanish) (Edition No. 02) (June 14, 2022)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Registration Procedure for Research Ethics Committees (CEI) for Health Research with Human Beings (G-ECRegProcs - Spanish) (English-G-ECRegProcs - Google Translation) (Edition No. 1) (July 26, 2021)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Technical Document: Manual of Good Storage Practices for Pharmaceutical Products, Medical Devices and Health Products in Laboratories, Drugstores, Specialized Warehouses and Customs Warehouses (G-GSPs - Spanish) (March 2, 2015)
Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Virtual Submission Platform - User Manual (G-MPVManual - Spanish) (May 5, 2022)
General Office of Information and Systems, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
Additional Resources
(Article) Ministry of Health approves Directive that Establishes the Treatment of Personal Data Related to Health or Personal Health Data (PER-101- Spanish) (English-PER-101 – Google Translation) (September 2020)
Benites, Vargaz & Ugaz
(Article) Peru Publishes New Personal Data Protection Regulations (PER-122 - Spanish) (January 8, 2025)
Escobedo, Catherine; IAPP
(Article) The Designation of the Data Protection Officer: The Case of Peru (PER-121) (March 7, 2025)
Hernandez, Sabrina; Baker McKenzie
(Article) The Protection of Personal Data (Law No. 29733) (PER-3 - Spanish) (May 28, 2019)
Belling, Miguel Ampudia; Peruweek
(Document) Communique No. 001-2017-OGITT/INS - Notification of Deviations to the INS OGITT (PER-4 - Spanish) (English-PER-4 – Google Translation) (July 19, 2017)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Document) Communique No. 001-2018-OGITT/INS - Notification of Critical or Very Serious and Major or Serious Deviations to the Clinical Trial Protocol (PER-12 - Spanish) (English-PER-12 – Google Translation) (March 13, 2018)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Document) Communique No. 001-2019-OGITT/INS – Legal Representative/Foreign Sponsor Representative Responsibilities (PER-7 - Spanish) (English-PER-7 – Google Translation) (March 6, 2019)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Document) Communique No. 001-2021-OGITT/INS - Communication of a New Version of the Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (REPEC) (PER-88 - Spanish) (English-PER-88 – Google Translation) (January 6, 2021)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Document) Communique No. 001-2023-OGITT/INS - New OGITT Address (PER-13 - Spanish) (English-PER-13 - Google Translation) (February 14, 2023)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Document) Communique No. 001-2024-DIIS/INS - Verification of Research Center Specialty Authorization in REPECv2 (PER-130 - Spanish) (English-PER-130 - Google Translation) (April 9, 2024)
Directorate of Health Research and Innovation, National Institute of Health
(Document) Communique No. 002-2024-DIIS/INS - Research Center Registration Certificate Validity Update Requirement (PER-131 - Spanish) (English-PER-131 - Google Translation) (June 10, 2024)
Directorate of Health Research and Innovation, National Institute of Health
(Document) Communique No. 003-2018-OGITT/INS - Forms for Reporting Progress and Final Reports (PER-14 - Spanish) (English-PER-14 – Google Translation) (May 7, 2018)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Document) Communique No. 004-2021-OGITT/INS - Sponsor Notification Regarding Trial Extension Requirements (PER-93 - Spanish) (English-PER-93 – Google Translation) (July 23, 2021)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Document) Communique No. 005-2018-OGITT/INS - Application of Article 35 of the Clinical Trials Regulations: Compensation to Research Subjects (PER-15 - Spanish) (English-PER-15 – Google Translation) (July 3, 2018)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Document) Communique No. 009-2022-OGITT/INS - Implementation of the Virtual Submission Platform (MPV) System (PER-103 - Spanish) (English-PER-103 – Google Translation) (July 7, 2022)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Document) Communique No. 004-2023-DIIS/INS - Validity of the Research Center Registration Certificate (PER-113 - Spanish) (English-PER-113 – Google Translation) (November 8, 2023)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Document) Communique No. 006-2023-DIIS/INS - REPECv1 Closure Notification and REPECv2 Report Submission Requirement (PER-92 - Spanish) (English-PER-92 – Google Translation) (December 15, 2023)
Directorate of Health Research and Innovation, National Institute of Health
(Document) Communique No. 002-2023-OGITT/INS - Migration of Information from the REPECv1 System to REPECv2 (PER-114 - Spanish) (English-PER-114 – Google Translation) (May 19, 2023)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Document) List of Products and Supplies to Import in the Clinical Trial – Annex 01 and Annex 02 (FOR-DIIS-033) (PER-116 - Spanish) (English-PER-116 – Google Translation) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Document) Multiple Office No. 014-2021-OGITT/INS - General Guidelines for the Approval of Protocols and Informed Consents (PER-83 - Spanish) (July 9, 2021)
General Office for Research and Technology Transfer, National Institute of Health
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (PER-11) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) National Code of Scientific Integrity (PER-79 - Spanish) (English-PER-79 - Google Translation) (November 5, 2019)
National Council of Science, Technology and Technological Innovation (CONCYTEC)
(Document) Pre-Assessment Checklist for Registration of Research Centers (PER-90 - Spanish) (English-PER-90 - Google Translation) (Version 1.0) (March 10, 2011)
REPEC, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(International Guidance) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) (PER-54) (Spanish-PER-54 – Official Translation) (Effective May 3, 2008)
UN General Assembly
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (PER-76) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (PER-52) (Step 4) (October 27, 1994)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (PER-124) (Step 4 version) (November 30, 1995)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (PER-53) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) International Guidelines for Health-Related Research Involving Humans (PER-78) (2016)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) and World Health Organization (WHO)
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with Pan American Health Organization (June 2025) (PER-77)
(Press Release) National Institute of Health Inaugurated a Virtual Submission Platform and Electronic Notification System (PER-104 - Spanish) (April 19, 2022)
National Institute of Health
(Press Release) The INS goes Hand in Hand with Technology and Promotes the Procedure for the Use of its Virtual Submission Platform (MPV) (PER-105 - Spanish) (June 23, 2022)
National Institute of Health
(Webpage) Clinical Trial Forms (PER-123 - Spanish) (Current as of August 13, 2025)
National Institute of Health
(Webpage) Access the Virtual Submission Platform (MPV) (PER-127 - Spanish) (Last Updated February 7, 2025)
National Institute of Health
(Webpage) Clinical Trials (PER-125 - Spanish) (Current as of August 13, 2025)
National Institute of Health
(Webpage) Clinical Trials Subdirectorate – Description (PER-56 - Spanish) (Last Updated March 21, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Contract Research Organization (CRO) Registration (PER-59 - Spanish) (Last Updated June 26, 2023)
REPEC, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Country Profile: Peru (PER-57) (Current as of August 13, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (DIIS) – Description (PER-20 - Spanish) (Last Updated January 14, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) EC Registration, Authorization and Procedures (PER-71 - Spanish) (Current as of April 23, 2024)
REPEC, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Forms, Guides and Annexes (PER-81 - Spanish) (Current as of April 23, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Functions of the Directorate of Health Research and Innovation (DIIS) (PER-55 - Spanish) (Last Updated December 18, 2023)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) General Directorate of Medicines, Supplies and Drugs (DIGIMED) (PER-109 - Spanish) (Current as of August 13, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Health Research Subdirectorate – Description (PER-68 - Spanish) (Last Updated January 14, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) INS Headquarters - Contact Information (PER-63 - Spanish) (Current as of August 13, 2025)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) INS Organization - INS Committees - Institutional Research Ethics Committee of the National Institute of Health (CIEI-INS) (PER-94 - Spanish) (Current as of August 13, 2025)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) List of Procedures (PER-72 - Spanish) (Current as of April 23, 2024)
REPEC, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) National Registry of Accredited Institutional Ethics Committees (PER-61 - Spanish) (Current as of April 23, 2024)
REPEC, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (REPEC) - Old Registration Platform (REPECv1) (PER-91 - Spanish) (English-PER-91) (Current as of April 23, 2024)
REPEC, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Peruvian Clinical Trials Registry (REPEC) - Registration Platform (REPECv2) (PER-89 - Spanish) (Current as of April 23, 2024)
REPEC, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Peruvian Registry of Clinical Trials (REPEC) - Description (PER-111 - Spanish) (Last Updated March 21, 2024)
REPEC, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Peruvian Registry of Clinical Trials (REPEC): Frequently Asked Questions (PER-120 - Spanish) (Last Updated February 12, 2025)
National Institute of Health
(Webpage) Register a Research Center in the Peruvian Registry of Clinical Trials (REPEC) (PER-73 - Spanish) (Last Updated June 13, 2023)
REPEC, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Register an Institutional Research Ethics Committee (CIEI) (PER-126 - Spanish) (Last Updated September 7, 2023)
National Institute of Health
(Webpage) Register as a Sponsor of a Clinical Trial (PER-60 - Spanish) (Last Updated May 12, 2023)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Register Your Health Service Provider Institution in Renipress (PER-80 - Spanish) (Last Updated July 31, 2020)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Registration and Accreditation of Ethics Committees (PER-98 - Spanish) (English-PER-98) (Current as of April 23, 2024)
REPEC, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Registration of Institutional Research Ethics Committee (PER-102) (Current as of April 23, 2024)
REPEC, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Request a Modification of the Clinical Trial Authorization Conditions (PER-118 - Spanish) (Last Updated February 14, 2025)
National Institute of Health
(Webpage) Request Authorization to Conduct a Clinical Trial (PER-115 - Spanish) (Last Updated December 10, 2024)
National Institute of Health
(Webpage) Serious Adverse Events Virtual Reporting System (REAS-NET) (PER-69 - Spanish) (Current as of April 23, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Virtual Submission Platform (PER-106 - Spanish) (Current as of April 23, 2024)
National Institute of Health
(Webpage) WHO Trial Registration Data Set (PER-86) (Version 1.3.1) (Current as of August 13, 2025)
International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP), World Health Organization (WHO)
Forms
(Form) Affidavit of Absence of Financial Conflict of Interest (FOR-DIIS-063) (PER-34 - Spanish) (English-PER-34 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Affidavit of Compliance with Minimum Research Center Requirements (FOR-DIIS-023) (PER-44 - Spanish) (English-PER-44 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 10, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Affidavit of Compliance with the Accreditation Standards of the Institutional Research Ethics Committee (CIEI) (FOR-DIIS-026) (PER-21 - Spanish) (English-PER-21 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Affidavit of Research Center Preparedness for Clinical Trial (FOR-DIIS-064) (PER-35 - Spanish) (English-PER-35 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Application for Accreditation of the Institutional Research Ethics Committee (FOR-DIIS-025) (PER-85 - Spanish) (English-PER-85 - Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Application for Authorization of Clinical Trial Amendment Report (FOR-DIIS-044) (PER-33 - Spanish) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Application for Clinical Trial Authorization (FOR-DIIS-028) (PER-24 - Spanish) (Edition No. 03) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Application for Closure of Clinical Trial Research Center (FOR-DIIS-040) (PER-43 - Spanish) (English-PER-43 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Application for Contract Research Organization Registration (FOR-DIIS-021) (PER-37 - Spanish) (English-PER-37 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Application for Expansion of the Number of Research Centers (FOR-DIIS-036) (PER-26 - Spanish) (English-PER-26 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Application for Principal Investigator Change (FOR-DIIS-038) (PER-28 - Spanish) (English-PER-28 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Application for Sponsor Registration (FOR-DIIS-020) (PER-36 - Spanish) (English-PER-36 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) CIOMS Form I (PER-18) (Date Unavailable)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(Form) Clinical Trial Progress Report (FOR-DIIS-054) (PER-47 - Spanish) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Clinical Trial Results Report to be Published in REPEC (FOR-DIIS-058) (PER-23 - Spanish) (English-PER-23 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Curriculum Vitae of the Research Team (FOR-DIIS-031) (PER-50 - Spanish) (English-PER-50 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Detailed Total Clinical Trial National Budget (FOR-DIIS-032) (PER-25 - Spanish) (English-PER-25 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Final National Report (FOR-DIIS-056) (PER-49 - Spanish) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Final Report of the Research Center (FOR-DIIS-055) (PER-48 - Spanish) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Inspection Sheet for a Clinical Trial (FOR-DIIS-049) (PER-100 - Spanish) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) International Final Report (FOR-OGITT-057) (PER-46 - Spanish) (English-PER-46 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 4, 2017)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) List of Products and Supplies to be Used in the Clinical Trial (FOR-DIIS-033) (PER-42 - Spanish) (English-PER-42 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Notification of Deviations to the Protocol (FOR-DIIS-053) (PER-40 - Spanish) (English-PER-40 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Notification of Pregnant Woman and Newborn in Clinical Trials (FOR-DIIS-047) (PER-39 - Spanish) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Other Relevant Notifications (FOR-DIIS-059) (PER-41 - Spanish) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Request for Clinical Trial Cancellation (FOR-DIIS-042) (PER-31 - Spanish) (English-PER-31 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Request for Clinical Trial Suspension (FOR-DIIS-041) (PER-30 - Spanish) (English-PER-30 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Request for Extension of Clinical Trials Conduct Time (FOR-DIIS-037) (PER-27 - Spanish) (English-PER-27 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Request for Sponsor or Contract Research Organization Change (FOR-DIIS-039) (PER-29 - Spanish) (English-PER-29 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Request to Expand or Modify the List of Supplies (FOR-DIIS-033) (PER-117 - Spanish) (English-PER-117 - Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Serious Adverse Event Report (FOR-DIIS-046) (PER-38 - Spanish) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Sponsor Affidavit for Sufficient Financial Funds (FOR-DIIS-029) (PER-51 - Spanish) (English-PER-51 – Google Translation) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Summary of the Annual Investigational Product Safety Report (FOR-DIIS-048) (PER-45 - Spanish) (Edition No. 01) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
(Form) Verification of Compliance with the Accreditation Standards of the Institutional Ethics Committees (CIEIs) (FOR-DIIS-027) (PER-22 - Spanish) (Edition No. 1) (October 15, 2024)
National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Sierra Leone
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
English
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
No - Except in case of public health emergency or determined by PBSL
Clinical trial registration required
Yes
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
Yes
Age of minors
Under 18
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone

As per the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs, the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial approvals, oversight, and inspections in the country. SLE-22 states that the PBSL was originally established through an Act of Parliament in 1988, and re-established in 2001 by the PDA2001, to regulate pharmaceutical products, medical devices, cosmetic chemical substances, food and dietary supplement and herbal products, the practice of pharmacy, and any other related matters. The PBSL operates within the Ministry of Health and Sanitation (MoHS). Per SLE-13, the PBSL is responsible for the safety, efficacy, and quality of all locally manufactured, imported, exported, distributed, sold or used drugs, medical devices, cosmetics, and nutritional agents.

Per the G-SLAppClinTrial, the PBSL monitors a clinical trial from beginning to end in order to ensure adequate protection of the general public against the risk of adverse events from authorized clinical trials. The PBSL also conducts on-site inspections of the clinical trial site, sponsor, or manufacturing facilities to ensure the safety of clinical trial participants, the quality and reliability of data obtained in a trial, and that the facilities used continue to be acceptable throughout the clinical investigation.

The G-SLAppClinTrial requires that the PBSL establish an Expert Committee on Pharmacovigilance and Clinical Trials to provide support in reviewing and authorizing clinical trial applications, and to give medical and scientific opinions on issues related to clinical trials and medicines safety. The PBSL acts as the Secretariat for the committee. For more information, see the G-SLAppClinTrial.

SLE-15 indicates that the PBSL’s Pharmacovigilance and Clinical Trials department is responsible for ensuring that the PBSL’s legal obligations in relation to drug safety are fulfilled in accordance with PDA2001.

Other Considerations

Please note: Sierra Leone is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (SLE-2), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see SLE-18.

Contact Information

According to the PBSL website, the contact information for the PBSL is as follows:

Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
Central Medical Stores Compound
New England Ville, Freetown
P.M.B. 322
Sierra Leone
Phone: +232 73994830 and +232 99117117
Email: info@pharmacyboard.gov.sl; registrar@pharmacyboard.gov.sl

SLE-4 provides the following details for the Pharmacovigilance and Clinical Trials Department:

Head of Department: Pharm. Onome Abiri Thomas
Phone: +232 78534757

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs, the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) is the regulatory authority responsible for reviewing, evaluating, and approving applications for clinical trials using registered and unregistered investigational products (IPs). The scope of the PBSL’s assessment includes all clinical trials (Phases I-IV). As delineated in the G-SLAppClinTrial, clinical trial application submissions to the PBSL and the national ethics committee (EC), the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC), may be made in parallel in the case of a public health emergency or as deemed fit by the PBSL.

Clinical Trial Review Process

As set forth in the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs, the PBSL coordinates the clinical trial application process. The SL-GCPs states that the sponsor/principal investigator (PI) must apply to the PBSL for approval to conduct a trial for a non-registered drug or a registered drug for new indications. The PBSL is responsible for reviewing the study design, which involves reviewing all significant ethical questions. The PBSL does a thorough scientific review of all applications for clinical trials to be conducted in Sierra Leone. According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, the PBSL must issue a Clinical Trial Certificate to authorize the initiation and conduct of the clinical trial.

As delineated in the G-SLAppClinTrial, the PBSL will inform the applicant in writing about the receipt of a valid clinical trial application or the formal grounds for non-acceptance, and the applicant must address formal grounds for non-acceptance. If changes are required and the applicant fails to modify the application correspondingly within a maximum of 30 working days, following the reasoned objections, the application will be deemed rejected. During evaluation, additional documents or changes may be requested through a query letter. Once a query has been raised and issued to the applicant, the process stops until the PBSL receives a written response to the query. If the PBSL requires changes to the application and the applicant fails to modify the application correspondingly within a maximum of 90 days following the reasoned objections, the application will be deemed rejected. See Figure 1 in Section 5.17 of the G-SLAppClinTrial for more details on the PBSL’s clinical trial authorization process.

The G-SLAppClinTrial indicates that any proposed amendment to the trial application, trial arrangements, and IP must be submitted to the SLESRC and the PBSL for approval before such amendments are carried out. If the amendments are substantial and are likely to have an impact on the safety of the trial participants, or are likely to change the interpretation of the scientific documents in support of the conduct of the trial, the sponsor must notify PBSL of the reasons for, and the content of, the amendments. For more details on amendment requirements, see the G-SLAppClinTrial.

According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, the Clinical Trial Certificate must be renewed annually with an application for renewal to the PBSL. A Clinical Trial Certificate will be revoked if conditions for which the certificate was issued are violated.

The G-SLAppClinTrial further states that if a clinical trial application is rejected by the PBSL, any person or institution may appeal the decision in writing within 60 days after receipt of the decision, to request PBSL review or reconsideration of the initial decision. The applicant must give grounds for review for each reason given in the clinical trial rejection. The grounds for the request must be based on the information that was submitted in the application. Upon review of the appeal application, the PBSL must provide the appeal application decision in writing, including a statement of reasons (e.g., findings, references to evidence, and reasons for the decision). For more information on appeal contents and timelines, see the G-SLAppClinTrial.

The G-SLInspect indicates that clinical trial inspections through on-site visits form part of the PBSL’s monitoring activities. Periodic good clinical practice (GCP) inspections of trial sites are conducted to ensure that the facilities used continue to be acceptable throughout the clinical investigation. The inspections may be carried out randomly and/or for specific reasons and are either announced or unannounced. An inspection would consist of a comparison of the procedures and practices of the PI with the commitments set out in the protocol and reports submitted to the PBSL by the investigator or the sponsor. See the G-SLInspect for more information.

Expedited Review During a Public Health Emergency

According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, if expedited review of a clinical trial during a public health emergency is anticipated, the applicant should inform the PBSL in writing. This will allow for a review team to be assembled and plans to be made to manage the workload as well as interactions with other oversight bodies such as the SLESRC. To ensure a rapid start of the clinical study, the PBSL will conduct simultaneous review, rather than sequential review, of the application with the SLESRC. For more information on expedited review, see the G-SLAppClinTrial.

Other Considerations

The G-SLAppClinTrial indicates that the PBSL may accept the decisions or scientific opinions of other national regulatory authorities, regional bodies, and international bodies if the IP or trial has been authorized by:

International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) founding regulatory members
ICH standing regulatory members
ICH regulatory members
ICH legislative and administrative authorities
The African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF) at a joint review meeting facilitated by the World Health Organization (WHO) with the provision of a favorable scientific opinion
Any other regulatory decision deemed appropriate by the PBSL
According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, the PBSL may also consider an application for joint or assisted review by multiple national regulatory authorities and ECs for certain medical products of high public health value to countries on the African continent. For more information, see the G-SLAppClinTrial.

For information on applications involving biosimilar products, see the G-SLBiosimilar.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone

As per the G-SLAppClinTrial, the applicant is responsible for paying a non-refundable fee to the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) to submit a clinical trial application for authorization. As delineated below, the authorization fees for foreign sponsored clinical trials of therapeutics, vaccines, and other biological products are as follows:

Industry Funded (Phase I): $6,500 USD
Industry Funded (Phase II): $6,500 USD
Industry Funded (Phase III): $7,000 USD
Research Institution Funded: $5,000 USD
Protocol Amendment: $1,000 USD
Expedited Protocol Review: $1,200 USD
Renewal of Clinical Trial Certificate (yearly): $100 USD
For locally sponsored clinical trials of therapeutics, vaccines, and other biological products the fees are as follows:

Investigator/Local Phases: $2,000 USD
Protocol Amendment: $750 USD
Expedited Protocol Review: $900 USD
Renewal of Clinical Trial Certificate (yearly): $50 USD
Payment Instructions

No information is currently available regarding payment instructions for the clinical trial application fee to the PBSL.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Overview

The G-SLAppClinTrial states that in Sierra Leone, the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC) fulfills the functions of the ethics committee (EC) (known as an Independent Ethics Committee (IEC) in Sierra Leone). Ethical clearance for all phases of clinical trials involving humans must be sought from the SLESRC. The SLESRC is responsible for ensuring the protection of the rights, safety, and well-being of trial participants, and providing assurance of that protection by reviewing, approving, and providing comments on trial protocols and the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, and the methods and materials to be used in obtaining and documenting informed consent of the trial participants.

Ethics Committee Composition

As per the SL-GCPs, the EC (i.e., the SLESRC) should consist of members who collectively have the qualifications and experience required to review and evaluate the scientific, medical, and ethical aspects of a proposed clinical trial. Specifically, it is recommended that the EC should include:

At least five (5) members
At least one (1) member whose primary area of interest is nonscientific
At least one (1) member who is independent of the institution/trial site
Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

As set forth in the SL-GCPs, the EC (i.e., the SLESRC) must perform its functions according to written standard operating procedures (SOPs), maintain written records of its activities and meeting minutes, and comply with good clinical practice (GCP) and other applicable regulatory requirements. An EC must make its decisions at announced meetings where a quorum, as stipulated in the SOPs, is present. Only those EC members who are independent of the trial’s principal investigator (PI) and sponsor should vote or provide an opinion on any trial-related matters. In addition, only members who participate in the EC review process and discussion should vote and provide their opinion.

The SL-GCPs also states that the EC must retain all relevant records (e.g., written procedures, membership lists, lists of occupations/affiliations of members, submitted documents, minutes of meetings, and correspondence) for at least three (3) years after the study’s conclusion, and make them available to the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) upon request. The EC may be asked by investigators, sponsors, or the PBSL to provide its written procedures and membership lists.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Overview

According to the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs, the primary scope of information assessed by the national ethics committee (EC), the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC), relates to protecting the well-being and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial.

As per the SL-GCPs, the EC (i.e., the SLESRC) must also pay special attention to trials that may include vulnerable subjects.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

As indicated in the G-SLAppClinTrial, clinical trial application submissions to the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) and the SLESRC may be made in parallel in the case of a public health emergency or as deemed fit by the PBSL. For parallel submissions, the PBSL requires proof of the application’s submission to the SLESRC, as well as any updated versions of documents or information as requested by the SLESRC.

The G-SLEthics further specifies that the principal investigator (PI) must obtain approval for a clinical trial from the SLESRC. The PI should submit a proposal along with other required documentation to the SLESRC Chair at least two (2) calendar months prior to the anticipated commencement of the proposed study.

The SL-GCPs requires that the EC review a proposed clinical trial within a reasonable time and document its views in writing, clearly identifying the trial, the documents reviewed, and the dates for the following: approval/favorable opinion; modifications required prior to its approval/favorable opinion; disapproval/negative opinion; and termination/suspension of any prior approval/favorable opinion. The EC must conduct continuing review of each ongoing trial at intervals appropriate to the degree of risk to human participants, but at least once per year.

There is no stated expiration date for EC approval in the G-SLAppClinTrial, the SL-GCPs, or the G-SLEthics.

(See the Submission Process and Timeline of Review sections for detailed submission process requirements.)

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee

The G-SLEthics indicates that the national ethics committee (EC), the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC), requires the principal investigator (PI) to pay a nonrefundable administrative fee to submit a protocol for ethical review and approval. The fees are as follows:

For self-funded, individual Sierra Leonean researchers based in Sierra Leone: 300,000 Leones
For graduate students studying in Sierra Leone: 200,000 Leones
For Sierra Leonean students studying abroad: $100 United States Dollars (USD)
For Sierra Leonean academics abroad: $150 USD
For all foreign students studying abroad: $200 USD
For self-funded, international researchers: $400 USD
For national/local non-governmental organizations (NGOs)/community-based organizations (CBOs): 2,000,000 Leones
For international NGOs based in Sierra Leone and international universities conducting non-clinical research: 4,000,000 Leones
For multinational institutions, donor agencies, and institutions not ordinarily based in Sierra Leone: $1,500 USD
For exclusively government funded studies: 500,000 Leones (must be submitted with a cover letter from the Permanent Secretary of the relevant Ministry or the Chief Medical Officer in the case of the Ministry of Health and Sanitation (MoHS))
For any amendment made to a previously approved application: 25% of the current fee for the first request, 50% for the second, and 100% for subsequent ones. Sierra Leonean students are exempt from this charge.
For an application extension: 25% of the original fee
For exclusively electronic applications: additional $50 USD
Payment Instructions

No information is currently available regarding payment instructions for the SLESRC.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Overview

SLE-3 indicates that the national ethics committee (EC), the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC), does not have a supervisory or oversight mandate over institutional ECs for health research. Few institutions have their own institutional ECs.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

No applicable requirements.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs, Sierra Leone requires the sponsor and principal investigator (PI) to obtain clinical trial authorization from the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) before commencement of the clinical trial. Furthermore, per the G-SLEthics, the PI is required to obtain ethics approval from the national ethics committee (EC), the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC).

As indicated in the G-SLAppClinTrial, a favorable opinion from the SLESRC is a required element of a clinical trial application to the PBSL. However, submissions to the PBSL and the SLESRC may be made in parallel in the case of a public health emergency or as deemed fit by the PBSL.

Regulatory Submission

The G-SLAppClinTrial indicates that applicants must submit 15 hard copies of all clinical trial application documents to the PBSL, as well as one (1) soft copy in Microsoft Word format (Acrobat PDF files are also acceptable).

As per the G-SLAppClinTrial, the delivery address for a clinical trial application is as follows:

The Registrar
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
Central Medical Stores
New England Ville, Freetown
P.M.B. 322
Sierra Leone

As per SLE-23, the clinical trial application and accompanying material must be provided in English.

Ethics Review Submission

The G-SLEthics states that the PI should submit to the SLESRC five (5) hard copies of the full research proposal (and all supporting documents) detailing the ethical issues in the study and how they will be addressed (only three (3) copies for extensions), each in a separate envelope. In addition, an electronic copy of the application should be emailed to efoday@health.gov.sl. The G-SLEthics also indicates that the PI may submit an exclusively electronic application for an additional fee. See the Ethics Committee Fees section for more information.

The G-SLEthics states that PIs should submit their applications with a cover letter addressed to the Chair of the SLESRC at least two (2) calendar months before the anticipated commencement of the proposed study.

Per the G-SLEthics, the delivery information for the SLESRC is as follows:

Office of the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee
Ministry of Health and Sanitation
Directorate of Policy, Planning & Information (DPPI)
Youyi Building, Fifth Floor, East Wing
Freetown
Sierra Leone
Phone: +23278 366493

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

As per the G-SLAppClinTrial and SLE-9, the following documentation must be submitted to the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Cover letter, including the list of documents submitted and their version number and date
Non-refundable application fee as specified in the PBSL’s Fee Schedule (see Appendix I of the G-SLAppClinTrial)
Protocol with all the relevant sections including site-specific addendums (see below for detailed protocol requirements)
Two (2) copies of the completed clinical trial application forms signed by authorized persons, including cover page (see Appendix II of the G-SLAppClinTrial)
Proof of registration with the Pan African Clinical Trial Registry (PACTR) (SLE-19) or an internationally recognized PBSL-approved online registry
Investigator’s Brochure (IB)
Synopsis of previous trial(s) with the investigational product(s) (IP(s)), if applicable
Summary of product characteristics or other professional information for all registered medicines used in the trial, or the international equivalent if the medicines are not registered in Sierra Leone
A list of the planned clinical trial sites and the planned number of trial participants at the sites
The name and position of the principal investigator(s) (PI(s)) who will be responsible for the sites where the trial is to be conducted, who must be registered with the relevant statutory health council, where applicable, and a resident in Sierra Leone
Signed curriculum vitae(s) (CVs) for all key staff participating in the conduct of the clinical trial, as well as other relevant documents (see Annex 8 of SLE-6 for the recommended CV format for staff conducting clinical trials)
Proof of current training in good clinical practice (GCP) for investigator(s), pharmacist(s), and monitor(s)
Proof of registration of the key investigators with a professional statutory body, if applicable
Any previous training in the principles of GCP or experience obtained from work with clinical trials and patient care
Any conditions, such as economic interests and institutional affiliations, that might influence the impartiality of the investigator(s)
Proof of current, relevant, and appropriate study insurance for all participants undertaken by the sponsor
Proof of sponsor indemnification for investigator(s) and trial site(s) (see Annex 7 of SLE-6 for suggested wording of the sponsor indemnification)
Professional indemnity insurance for investigator(s) and other trial staff
Details of the site(s) where the trial is to be conducted and a duly justified written statement on the suitability of the clinical trial sites adapted to the nature and use of the IP. This should include a description of the suitability of facilities, equipment, and human resources, and a description of expertise, issued by the head of the clinic/institution at the clinical trial site or other responsible party
A favorable opinion from the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC). In the case of a parallel submission, proof of clinical trial application submission to the SLESRC and the updated versions of documents or information as requested by the SLESRC are required
Recruitment arrangements
Signed joint financial declaration between the sponsor and the PI (see Appendix IIIc of the G-SLAppClinTrial and Annex 4 of SLE-6)
Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) membership, CVs, and signed charter
IP dossier and label
Product information if the IP is registered: summary of product characteristics, patient information leaflet/package insert, and labelling
Current good manufacturing practice (GMP) certificate issued from the national regulatory authority of the country where the IP is manufactured
Product information and certificate of analysis for the concomitant and rescue medications
Certificate(s) of analysis of the IP
Certificate(s) of accreditation for the central laboratories
Participant information sheet, informed consent form (ICF), and informed consent procedure
Signed declaration by the applicant (see Annex 2 of SLE-6)
Sponsor/PI contractual agreement, including the study budget
Signed declaration by the PI and the sponsor of the trial that they are familiar with and understand the protocol, and will comply with GCP as determined by the PBSL in the conduct of the trial (see Appendix IIIa of the G-SLAppClinTrial and Annex 4 on page 12 of SLE-6)
Workload forms for investigator(s)
Signed declaration(s) by the local PI, as well as each investigator and key staff participating in the clinical trial (see Appendix IIIb of the G-SLAppClinTrial and Annex 5 of SLE-6)
Signed declaration(s) by the sub-investigators and key staff participating in the clinical trial
CVs and signed declaration by regional monitor(s) (see Annex 6 of SLE-6)
Copies of recruitment advertisement(s) and questionnaires, if applicable
Electronic copies of key peer reviewed publications following International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) recommendations to support the application, if applicable
Labelled CD-ROM (list of files submitted on CD-ROM)
See the G-SLAppClinTrial for more details, including the application submission checklist (Appendix IIa) and the application form (Appendix IIb). The application checklist and form are also available at SLE-9 and SLE-6, respectively.

Additionally, see Appendix V of the G-SLAppClinTrial for the Clinical Trial Amendment Form. See also SLE-8 for the amendment checklist.

Ethics Committee Requirements

As per the G-SLEthics, the SLESRC requires the PI to submit the following documentation for ethics approval:

Cover letter to the Chair of the Committee
ICF attached to each proposal (Committee does not accept verbal consent, except where it is supported by an independent witness)
Completed checklist for the Essential Elements in the Application for Approval (see the G-SLEthics)
Brief CV for the PI and associates clearly stating their roles (not more than four (4) pages each)
Study proposals submitted for award of a degree must be accompanied by a letter of confirmation from the supervisor and approval by the institution’s review board
Requests for amendment or extension of study should include a copy of the previous approval letter
A non-refundable administrative fee for each proposal submitted (see the Ethics Committee Fees section for detailed fee information)
Clinical Protocol

The G-SLAppClinTrial indicates that the clinical trial protocol must comply with the International Council for Harmonisation's (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (SLE-24) and the SL-GCPs. Accordingly, the protocol must include:

General information (protocol title, identifying number, and date; contact information for the sponsor, medical expert, investigator(s), trial site(s), qualified physician(s), and laboratory and/or institutions involved in the study)
Background information
Objectives and purpose
Trial design
Selection, withdrawal, and treatment of participants
Assessment of efficacy
Assessment of safety
A description of the statistical methods to be used in the trial
Direct access to source data and documents
Quality control and quality assurance
Ethical considerations
Data handling and recordkeeping
Financing and insurance
Publication policy
Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Overview

The G-SLAppClinTrial indicates that the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) and the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC) reviews may be conducted in parallel in the case of a public health emergency or as deemed fit by the PBSL. For parallel submissions, the PBSL requires proof of the application’s submission to the SLESRC, as well as any updated versions of documents or information as requested by the SLESRC.

Regulatory Authority Approval

Per the G-SLAppClinTrial, the PBSL’s processing times of clinical trial applications for different investigational products (IPs) are as follows, unless otherwise specified by the PBSL on a case-by-case basis:

Medical devices - 40 working days
Pharmaceuticals - 50 working days
Biological and biotechnology medical products - 60 working days
Genetically modified organisms - 120 working days
As delineated in the G-SLAppClinTrial, the PBSL will inform the applicant in writing about the receipt of a valid clinical trial application or the formal grounds for non-acceptance within 10 working days from the receipt of the application. The applicant must address formal grounds for non-acceptance within 10 working days. If changes are required and the applicant fails to modify the application correspondingly within a maximum of 30 working days, following the reasoned objections, the application will be deemed rejected. If the PBSL requires changes to the application and the applicant fails to modify the application correspondingly within a maximum of 90 days following the reasoned objections, the application will be deemed rejected. See Figure 1 in Section 5.17 of the G-SLAppClinTrial for more details on the PBSL’s clinical trial authorization process.

According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, if expedited review of a clinical trial during a public health emergency is anticipated, the applicant should inform the PBSL in writing. The timeline for processing such applications is 10-20 working days. For more information on expedited review, see the Scope of Assessment section and the G-SLAppClinTrial.

The G-SLAppClinTrial further indicates that any proposed amendment to the trial application, trial arrangements, and IP must be submitted to the SLESRC and the PBSL for approval before such amendments are carried out. The PBSL’s processing time for protocol amendment applications is 30 working days. For more details on amendment requirements, see the G-SLAppClinTrial.

The G-SLAppClinTrial states that the PBSL must issue a Clinical Trial Certificate to authorize the trial to be conducted, which must be renewed annually. The PBSL’s processing time for a Clinical Trial Certificate renewal application is 15 working days.

The G-SLAppClinTrial further states that if a clinical trial application is rejected by the PBSL, any person or institution may appeal the decision in writing within 60 days after receipt of the decision, to request PBSL review or reconsideration of the initial decision. The PBSL’s response to the appeal application must be addressed to the affected person or institution within 90 days of the appeal’s submission. For more information on appeal contents and timelines, see the G-SLAppClinTrial.

According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, the PBSL’s processing time for IP import permits is 10 working days.

Ethics Committee Approval

No information is currently available on the SLESRC’s timeline of review.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the G-SLAppClinTrial, a clinical trial can only commence after the sponsor and the principal investigator (PI) receive authorization from Sierra Leone’s Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) via a Clinical Trial Certificate. Additionally, per the G-SLAppClinTrial, the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC) fulfills the functions of the ethics committee (EC) (known as an Independent Ethics Committee (IEC) in Sierra Leone) in the country. Ethics approval must be obtained from the SLESRC prior to initiating a study. The G-SLEthics indicates that the PI must obtain the SLESRC approval.

In addition, as per SLE-23, no waiting period is required following the applicant’s receipt of PBSL and SLESRC approval. According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, the PBSL must be informed of the trial’s initiation in writing on the exact date the study commences. If the trial does not begin or is delayed, then the PBSL must be informed of the new commencement date within 90 days of the Clinical Trial Certificate’s issuance. SLE-23 further indicates that investigators are required to notify their local institution prior to initiating a trial.

As per the G-SLAppClinTrial, a permit from the PBSL is required for the import of an investigational product (IP) to be used in a trial. (See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information.)

Clinical Trial Agreement

The G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs state that the clinical protocol submitted to the PBSL must include a signed contractual agreement between the sponsor and the PI.

As required by the G-SLAppClinTrial, the sponsor/PI contractual agreement must have sections indicating:

Study title
Protocol version and date
Trial site
IP information
Definitions of all terms
Effective date of agreement
Outline of the sponsor’s responsibilities, which must include general management of the trial; provision of adequate funding, resources/logistics and IPs for the study; and insurance for the study participants
Outline of the PI’s responsibilities, which must include retaining all trial related essential documents until the sponsor informs the PI these documents are no longer needed
Term (period of study duration) and termination of agreement (conditions for this)
Confidentiality
Per the SL-GCPs, the sponsor should obtain the investigator’s/institution’s agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with good clinical practice (GCP), with the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and with the PBSL-approved protocol
Comply with procedures for data recording/reporting
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
The sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement.

Clinical Trial Registration

The G-SLAppClinTrial states that proof of trial registration with the Pan African Clinical Trial Registry (PACTR) (SLE-19), or an internationally recognized PBSL-approved online registry, must be submitted as part of a clinical trial application to the PBSL.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

According to the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Sierra Leone’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (or Adverse Experience) (AE) – Any untoward medical occurrence in a participant to whom an investigational product (IP) has been administered, including occurrences which are not necessarily caused by or related to that product
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – Any noxious and unintended response to an IP which is related to any dose administered to that participant
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or is a congenital anomaly/birth defect
Unexpected Adverse Event/Adverse Drug Reaction – An adverse reaction where the nature or severity is inconsistent with the applicable product information
Safety Reporting Requirements

As stated in the G-SLAppClinTrial, the sponsor and the principal investigator(s) (PIs) are responsible for proper reporting of AEs and SAEs. The sponsor should expedite the reporting of all AEs that are both serious and unexpected. Any SAEs/SADRs must be reported to the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) immediately where possible. In any event, the SAEs/SADRs must be reported to the PBSL within 48 hours of site awareness, but no later than 15 calendar days.

The SL-GCPs indicates that all SAEs/SADRs should be reported immediately except for those incidents documented by the protocol or the investigator’s brochure that do not require immediate reporting. The immediate reports should be followed promptly by detailed, written reports. The reports should identify participants by unique code numbers. AEs and/or laboratory abnormalities identified in the protocol as critical to safety evaluations should be reported to the PBSL. Furthermore, per the G-SLAppClinTrial, any SAE/SADR related to the IP should receive immediate medical attention.

In addition, per the G-SLAppClinTrial, any frequent AEs/ADRs should be reported to the PBSL immediately where possible, and in any event, within seven (7) days of site awareness. Non-serious AEs must be reported to the PBSL on request and, where applicable, submitted as part of an application for registration.

The G-SLAppClinTrial indicates that non-serious AEs must be reported on request and where applicable, submitted as part of an application for registration.

Investigator Responsibilities

The G-SLAppClinTrial states that in the event of an SAE/SADR, the PI is required to submit follow-up information (e.g., copies of diagnostic test results, laboratory reports, medical record progress notes) as soon as it becomes available. This information should be clearly marked as updated information and include the protocol and participant numbers. Follow-up reports must be submitted immediately when there is a change in the severity of the SAE/SADR initially reported, whenever there is any new development on an initially reported SAE/SADR, and/or when the SAE/SADR is resolved. Follow-up reports must include an assessment of the importance and implication of any findings. All fatal cases must be accompanied by a formal autopsy report. In exceptional circumstances where a formal autopsy is not practicable, provision of a verbal autopsy report must be prior approved by the PBSL and be given with ample reasons. SLE-23 indicates that the investigator is responsible for submitting these follow-up reports, but the sponsor can also report through the contract research organization.

As per the SL-GCPs, the investigator should also comply with applicable regulatory requirements related to reporting unexpected SAEs/SADRs to the PBSL. For a reported death, the investigator should supply the PBSL with any additional requested information (e.g., autopsy reports and terminal medical reports).

Sponsor Responsibilities

According to the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs, the sponsor is required to expedite the reporting of all AEs/ADRs that are both serious and unexpected to the PBSL. The SL-GCPs further indicates that the sponsor must also expedite the reporting of all AEs/ADRs that are both serious and unexpected to all concerned investigator(s)/institutions(s) and the ethics committee(s).

Per the SL-GCPs, the sponsor is responsible for the ongoing safety evaluation of IPs, and should promptly notify the investigator(s)/institution(s) and the PBSL of findings that could adversely affect participant safety, impact the conduct of the trial, or alter the PBSL’s approval of the trial.

Other Safety Reports

The G-SLAppClinTrial indicates that notifications of changes in nature, severity, or frequency of risk factors must be submitted to the PBSL within 28 days, and new information that impacts the risk benefit profile of the product or conduct of the trial must be reported within seven (7) days.

Per the G-SLSftyMntrng and the G-SLAppClinTrial, a Development Safety Update Report (DSUR) must be submitted annually to the PBSL.

According to the G-SLSftyMntrng, the main objective of a DSUR is to present a comprehensive, thoughtful annual review and evaluation of pertinent safety information collected during the reporting period related to a drug under investigation, whether or not it is marketed, by:

Examining whether the information obtained by the sponsor during the reporting period is in accord with previous knowledge of the IP’s safety
Describing new safety issues that could have an impact on the protection of clinical trial participants
Summarizing the current understanding and management of identified and potential risks, and
Providing an update on the status of the clinical investigation/development program and study results
For more information on DSURs, see Section 12 of the G-SLSftyMntrng.

For safety reporting from foreign sites and other reporting requirements, see Appendicies VIa – VIc of the G-SLAppClinTrial.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, the SAE/SADR report form must include detailed information to enable a causality assessment report to be prepared by the PBSL’s Expert Committee on Drug Safety. The SAE/SADR form must conform to the format of the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences’ (CIOMS) Form I (SLE-7), or must be previously approved by the PBSL. Furthermore, all SAEs/suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions (SUSARs) and AEs/ADRs must be reported using the SLE-7 form format and also electronically through the PBSL’s online reporting platform (SLE-14). Frequent AEs/ADRs should be reported to the PBSL in a line listing and through the PBSL’s online reporting platform. Electronic submissions must be E2B compliant. See SLE-12 for the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s E2B Guidelines.

For non-serious AEs, the G-SLAppClinTrial indicates that individual reporting must be formatted in accordance with the data elements specified in the ICH Harmonised Tripartite Efficacy Guideline on Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (see SLE-12).

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

Per the SL-GCPs, the investigator should submit written summaries of the trial status to the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) as required in the G-SLAppClinTrial, or more frequently, if requested by the PBSL. The investigator should also promptly provide written reports to the PBSL on any changes that significantly affect the conduct of the trial and/or increase the risk to participants.

As set forth in the G-SLAppClinTrial, quarterly reports must be submitted starting from the date the Clinical Trial Certificate is issued using the Quarterly Progress Report Form provided in Appendix VIIb. The reports must be submitted to the PBSL within 21 days following the end of the previous quarter, and an interim report must be submitted within 21 days after the end of the first half of the trial period, and as stipulated in the protocol. If the trial is interrupted, the reason must be communicated in writing to the PBSL within 10 working days. See the G-SLAppClinTrial for additional details on preparing progress reports.

Final Report

According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, the principal investigator (PI) or the sponsor must notify the PBSL no later than 30 days following the trial’s completion and submit a preliminary report on the trial. This report, referred to as a close-out report in the G-SLAppClinTrial, must be submitted to PBSL after study completion in the recommended format as per Appendix VIII.

The G-SLAppClinTrial delineates that in addition to the close-out report, the PI or the sponsor must compile and submit a comprehensive formal report to the PBSL no later than 90 days following the trial’s completion. The report should conform to the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) Harmonised Tripartite Guideline - Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (SLE-11). The report must include a short but comprehensive summary of the essential findings of the trial, as well as its methodology and course, and be submitted in hard and soft copies. Publication(s) of the study in a scientific journal or other medium for the purpose of disseminating the information obtained to stakeholders may be done only after notification of the PBSL.

The SL-GCPs indicates that the investigator is responsible for submitting the final report summarizing the trial’s outcome to the PBSL.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
As per the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs, a sponsor is defined as an individual, company, institution, or organization that takes ultimate responsibility for the initiation, management, and financing of a trial.

In accordance with the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs, the sponsor may authorize a contract research organization (CRO) to perform one (1) or more of its trial-related duties and functions. However, the ultimate responsibility for the trial’s data quality and integrity always resides with the sponsor.

The SL-GCPs further requires that any trial-related duty and function that is transferred to and assumed by a CRO should be specified in writing. The sponsor should ensure oversight of any trial-related duties and functions carried out on its behalf, including trial-related duties and functions that are subcontracted to another party by the sponsor’s contracted CRO(s). Any trial-related duties and functions not specifically transferred to and assumed by a CRO are retained by the sponsor.

Additionally, as delineated in the SL-GCPs, a sponsor-investigator is defined as an individual who both initiates and conducts, alone or with others, a clinical trial, and under whose immediate direction the investigational product is administered to, dispensed to, or used by a participant. The term does not include any person other than an individual (e.g., it does not include a corporation or an agency). The obligations of a sponsor-investigator include both those of a sponsor and those of an investigator.

Per SLE-23, a foreign individual/organization may be the sponsor of a clinical trial, but a local representative in Sierra Leone is required.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Overview

The SL-GCPs states that the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical trial and for ensuring that the investigator(s) are qualified by training and experience. Additionally, the sponsor must define and allocate all trial-related duties and responsibilities to the relevant parties. Prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s) and the institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and an investigator’s brochure.

As stated in the G-SLAppClinTrial, the principal investigator (PI) directly in charge of a trial, and at each site in a multi-center trial, must possess appropriate qualifications, training, and experience. The PI must be a scientist and domicile in Sierra Leone.

The G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs further indicate that the PI must be responsible for the proper conduct of the trial(s), have previous experience as a co-investigator in at least two (2) trials in the relevant professional area, and have proof of formal training in good clinical practice (GCP) for at least two (2) years. See the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs for additional requirements.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

Per SLE-23, a foreign individual/organization may be the sponsor of a clinical trial, but a local representative in Sierra Leone is required.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

As indicated in the G-SLAppClinTrial, the sponsor must establish an independent data-monitoring committee, such as a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB), to regularly assess the trial’s progress and analyze safety data. The applicant must provide a copy of the DSMB’s membership, curriculum vitaes, and signed charter in the clinical trial application package submitted to the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL). However, the SL-GCPs indicates that establishing a DSMB is optional.

The G-SLAppClinTrial further indicates that a duly signed and authenticated DSMB report(s) and/or minutes must be forwarded to the PBSL upon request. For more information on DSMB requirements, see the G-SLAppClinTrial.

Multicenter Studies

As delineated in the SL-GCPs, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor, and the approvals of the PBSL and the ethics committee
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication between investigators is facilitated
In addition, the sponsor may organize a coordinating committee or select coordinating investigators.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Insurance

The G-SLAppClinTrial states that for all sponsor-initiated trials, a valid insurance certificate for the duration of the study must be provided before initiating the study, and a copy of this coverage must be included in the clinical trial application submission to the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL). Sponsors and principal investigators (PIs) must ensure insurance cover for clinical trial participants and must submit a certificate of insurance cover for participants as evidence. The certificate must at least contain:

Insurance company
Policy number
Initial date
Expiry date
Insured (Policy Holder/Sponsor)
Description of activity (purpose of the policy)
The G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs also state that the sponsor must provide insurance or indemnify the investigator(s)/institution(s) against claims arising from the trial, except for those claims arising from malpractice and/or negligence as stipulated in the G-SLAppClinTrial. See Annex 7 of SLE-6 for suggested wording of the sponsor indemnification.

Compensation

Injury or Death

The SL-GCPs indicate that the sponsor's policies and procedures should address the costs of treatment of trial subjects in the event of trial-related injuries in accordance with the applicable requirement(s). In addition, when trial participants receive compensation, the method and manner of compensation should comply with the PBSL's requirements.

Trial Participation

According to the SL-GCPs, the ethics committee (EC) (i.e., the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC)) should review both the amount and method of payment to participants to assure that neither presents problems of coercion or undue influence. Payments to a participant should be prorated and not wholly contingent on the participant’s completion of the trial. The EC should also ensure that information regarding payment to participants, including the methods, amounts, and schedule of payment, is set forth in the written informed consent form and any other written information to be provided to participants. The way payment will be prorated should be specified.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As stated in the SL-GCPs, the sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol, good clinical practice (GCP), and the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL)’s regulatory requirement(s). The sponsor is responsible for obtaining agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. QC should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been correctly processed.

Monitoring Requirements

As part of its QA system, the SL-GCPs notes that the sponsor may choose to perform a clinical trial audit. The purpose of the audit should be to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, the PBSL, and other applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor should ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience, and that their qualifications are documented. The sponsor must also ensure that the audit is conducted in accordance with the sponsor’s own written procedures on what to audit, how to audit, the frequency of audits, and the form and content of audit reports. The observations and findings of the auditor(s) should be documented. No specific timeframe is provided for the audit process. See the SL-GCPs for detailed audit requirements.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

As per the SL-GCPs, if a trial is terminated or suspended prematurely, the sponsor should promptly inform the investigator(s)/institution(s) and the PBSL of the termination or suspension, and explain the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. The ethics committee (EC) (i.e., the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC)) should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor or by the investigator/institution.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

As delineated in the SL-GCPs, when using electronic trial data handling and/or remote electronic data systems, the sponsor must ensure and document that the electronic data processing system(s) conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance, and that the sponsor maintains standard operating procedures (SOPs) for using these systems. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties with respect to the use of these computerized systems should be clear, and the users should be provided with training in their use. Refer to the SL-GCPs for detailed information on electronic trial data systems.

Records Management

As set forth in the SL-GCPs, the sponsor, or other data owners, should retain all sponsor-specific essential documents pertaining to the trial for at least two (2) years after formal discontinuation of the trial or in conformance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s) of the country(ies) where the product is approved, and/or where the sponsor intends to apply for approval(s). In addition, all clinical and experimental data (electronic or paper) must be kept in a secure place for a period of five (5) years, or 20 years for a new drug application, after a trial’s completion. The data must also be readily available for review upon request by the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL).

See the SL-GCPs for a list of essential documents for the conduct of a clinical trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
No information is currently available regarding personal data protection requirements.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Sierra Leone clinical trials, a freely given informed consent must be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the SL-GCPs. In obtaining and documenting informed consent, the investigator should comply with Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) requirements and should adhere to good clinical practice (GCP) and to the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki (SLE-5), which is available in Appendix 3 of the SL-GCPs.

As per the SL-GCPs and the G-SLAppClinTrial, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document. The sponsor and principal investigator (PI) must submit the ICF to the PBSL with the clinical trial application. The G-SLEthics further indicates that the PI must also submit the ICF to the national ethics committee (EC), the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC), for review. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.)

The SL-GCPs states that the investigator, or the investigator’s designated representative, must provide detailed research study information to the participant or legal representative/guardian. In addition, the oral and written information concerning the trial, including the ICF, should be easy to understand and presented without coercion or unduly influencing a potential participant to enroll in the clinical trial. The participant or legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate.

As per the SL-GCPs, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or appear to waive their legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representatives from their liabilities for any negligence.

Re-Consent

According to the SL-GCPs, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial. The communication of this information should be documented, and the participant or legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF updates, including a copy of any amendments to the written information provided to the participants.

Language Requirements

As per SLE-23, the clinical trial application and accompanying material must be provided to the PBSL in English.

Documenting Consent

The SL-GCPs states that the participant or legal representative/guardian, as well as the investigator(s), must sign and date the ICF.

Where the participant is illiterate or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. The witness should sign and date the ICF after:

The written ICF and any other written information is read and explained to the participant or legal representative/guardian;
The participant or legal representative/guardian has orally consented to the participant’s involvement in the trial; and
The participant or legal representative/guardian has signed and dated the ICF, if capable of doing so.
According to the G-SLEthics, the SLESRC does not accept verbal consent, except when supported by an independent witness.

Per the SL-GCPs, before participating in the study, the participant or legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF.

Waiver of Consent

The SL-GCPs delineates that where the protocol indicates that prior consent of the participant or legal representative/guardian is not possible, the EC (i.e., the SLESRC) should determine whether the proposed protocol and/or other document(s) adequately addresses relevant ethical concerns and meets applicable regulatory requirements for such trials. See the Emergencies and Mentally Impaired sections for more information.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Based on the SL-GCPs, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable:

The study involves research and an explanation of its nature and purpose
Trial procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
Expected duration of participation
Participant’s responsibilities in the trial
Experimental aspects of the study
Approximate number of participants involved in the trial
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
Any foreseeable risks or discomforts, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
Any expected benefits or prorated payment; if no benefit is expected, the participant should also be made aware of this
Alternative procedures or treatment that may be available
Compensation and/or medical treatment available to the participant in the event of a trial-related injury
Person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
Any additional costs that may result from participation in the research
That the monitor(s), the auditor(s), the ethics committee (EC) (i.e., the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC)), and the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) will be granted direct access to the participant’s original medical records to verify clinical trial procedures and/or data without violating the participant’s confidentiality
That records identifying the participant will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted by applicable laws and/or regulations, will not be made publicly available. If the results are published, the participant’s identity will remain confidential
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without the participant’s consent
That participation is voluntary, the participant may withdraw at any time, and refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits, or reduction in the level of care to which the participant is otherwise entitled
The participant or legal representative/guardian will be notified in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the course of the study which may affect the participant's willingness to continue
Additionally, see Annex 1 of SLE-6 for standardized wording for the ICF.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the SL-GCPs, which is guided by the International Council for Harmonsation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (SLE-24), the Declaration of Helsinki (SLE-5), and other international guidelines, Sierra Leone’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. The SL-GCPs and the G-SLAppClinTrial state that a participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As stated in the SL-GCPs, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As per the SL-GCPs, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation or treatment in the case of injury, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

According to the SL-GCPs and the G-SLAppClinTrial, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The SL-GCPs states that the research participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries and/or the participant’s rights.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

As set forth in the SL-GCPs and the G-SLAppClinTrial, the research participant’s dignity, safety, and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

See the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
The SL-GCPs make provisions to protect the rights of a research participant during the informed consent process when the procedure is complicated by emergency situations.

As delineated in the SL-GCPs, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) cannot be obtained from the research participant in an emergency, then the consent of the legal representative/guardian, if present, should be obtained. If prior consent of the participant or legal representative/guardian cannot be obtained, then the participant’s enrollment should follow measures specified in the protocol, and/or elsewhere, with documented approval/favorable opinion by the ethics committee (EC) (i.e., the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC)) and the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) to protect the rights, safety, and well-being of the participant and ensure compliance with EC and PBSL requirements. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial and provide consent as soon as possible.

In addition, per the SL-GCPs, because the participants who are experiencing medical emergencies are usually extremely vulnerable, these individuals should be excluded from all but minimally invasive observational research. ECs must also take great care when assessing emergency care research. Once the researcher has presented clear reasons to justify the initiation of emergency care research without consent to the EC, the EC may approve the research provided it is satisfied that:

Reasonable steps are being taken to ascertain the religious and cultural sensitivities of participants experiencing medical emergencies
The condition of the participant precludes the giving of consent
Inclusion in the trial is not contrary to the interests of the participant
The research is intended to be therapeutic and poses no more risk than is inherent to the patient’s condition or would be caused by alternative methods of treatment
The participant and the legal representative/guardian will be informed as soon as is reasonably possible of the patient’s inclusion in the study and of the option to withdraw from the research project at any time
The participant will be informed, and consent obtained, once the participant who has undergone the necessary emergency procedures has regained consciousness
The research is based on valid scientific hypotheses and offers a realistic possibility of benefit over standard care
Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Overview

As per the SL-GCPs, in all Sierra Leonean clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process.

According to the SL-GCPs and the G-SLAppClinTrial, vulnerable populations include individuals whose willingness to volunteer in a clinical trial may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with the participation, or of a retaliatory response from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate. The SL-GCPs states that other participants representing vulnerable populations include patients with incurable diseases, persons in nursing homes, unemployed or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent. Additionally, types of research that need additional attention include research involving collectivities, indigenous medical systems, innovative therapy or interventions, HIV and AIDS clinical and epidemiological research, and emergency care research.

The SL-GCPs indicates that the national ethics committee (EC), the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC), must pay special attention to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants, including minors, women, persons with mental disabilities or substance abuse related disorders, persons in dependent relationships or comparable situations, prisoners, and persons highly dependent on medical care.

Persons Highly Dependent on Medical Care

According to the SL-GCPs, participants who are highly dependent on medical care must be given special attention to protect the welfare of this vulnerable study population. Researchers need to acknowledge that the participant’s medical condition may compromise the participant’s informed consent and affect the participant’s ability to form an opinion or to communicate. There may also be a perception of coercion if a participant is reluctant to refuse consent for fear that it may compromise the participant’s medical treatment.

As delineated in the SL-GCPs, the following research areas require investigators to pay special attention to these participants to safeguard their welfare and ensure proper consent:

Intensive care research – Characteristic features are the difficulties in communicating with participants receiving ventilatory assistance and the impairment of cognition in heavily sedated participants. Whenever possible, information should be obtained from potential participants prior to their admission to intensive care. These participants should be excluded from all but minimally invasive observational research due to their extreme vulnerability.
Neonatal intensive care research – Research involving infants should be conducted in strict accordance with the principles discussed in the Children/Minors section. These principles do not permit research that is contrary to the child’s best interests.
Terminal care research – Research in terminal care is distinguished by the short remaining life expectancy of participants and potential vulnerability to unrealistic expectations of benefits. Researchers must ensure that the prospect of benefit from research participation is neither exaggerated nor used to justify a higher risk than that involved in the participant’s current treatment.
Research involving persons with impaired capacity to communicate or unconscious persons – Refer to the Mentally Impaired section.
Persons in Dependent Groups

As set forth in the SL-GCPs, for participants whose proposed involvement in research arises from dependent or comparable relationships, the EC must be satisfied that the participants’ consent is both adequately informed and voluntary. The following list provides some examples of hierarchically structured groups and the junior or subordinate relationships that may exist in these groups:

Older persons and their caregivers
Persons with chronic conditions or disabilities and their caregivers
Wards of the state and guardians
Patients and healthcare professionals
Students and teachers
Prisoners and prison authorities
Persons with life-threatening illnesses
Employees and employers (e.g., farm workers and their employers, members of the uniformed services and hospital staff and their employers)
See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
According to the SL-GCPs, a minor is someone under 18 years of age.

As set forth in the SL-GCPs, when the participant is a minor, informed consent must be obtained from the participant’s parent/legal guardian. Assent from the minor must also be obtained where the minor is capable of understanding. A minor’s refusal to participate in research must be respected.

The SL-GCPs indicates that the national ethics committee (EC), the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC), must pay special attention to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants, including minors. Research involving minors should be approved only if:

The research interventions, including those in observational research, presents the participant with no greater than minimal risk; or
The research interventions present more than minimal risk but hold out the prospect of direct benefit for the participant; or
The research interventions, including those in observational research, present more than minimal risk and do not hold out the prospect of direct benefit to the participant, but have a high probability of yielding generalizable knowledge.
In all cases, the protocol must provide sufficient information to justify clearly why minors should be included as participants.

Assent Requirements

The G-SLAppClinTrial also states that in trials involving minors, the parent/legal guardian of a minor is required to sign an informed consent form (ICF). In addition, an assent form similar to the ICF must also be signed and dated by a minor who is capable of understanding as a confirmation of the minor’s willingness to participate in a trial, after having been informed of all aspects of the trial that are relevant to the minor’s decision to participate.

As delineated in the SL-GCPs, assent refers to a minor’s affirmative agreement to participate in research. If a minor fails to object, this should not be construed as assent. The EC (i.e., the SLESRC) must ensure that adequate steps are specified in the protocol to obtain the minor’s assent when, in the EC’s judgment, the minor is capable of providing such assent. Additionally, when the EC determines that assent is required, it must also indicate whether and how such assent must be documented.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
The SL-GCPs requires that the national ethics committee (EC), the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC), pay special attention to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants, including women who are or may become pregnant.

The SL-GCPs states that the following conditions must be met for research conducted with pregnant women and fetuses:

Applicable studies on animals and non-pregnant individuals have been completed
The purpose of the study is to meet the health needs of the mother of the particular fetus, the risk to the fetus is minimal and, in all cases, presents the least possible risk for achieving the study’s objectives
Individuals engaged in the study will have no part in any decision as to the timing, method, and procedures used to terminate the pregnancy, and determining the viability of the fetus at the termination of the pregnancy
No procedural changes that could cause greater than minimal risk to the fetus or the pregnant woman will be introduced into the procedure for terminating the pregnancy solely in the interest of the activity
Per the SL-GCPs, for any study to be conducted that is associated with either the fetus in utero or ex utero, the parents should be legally competent and have given their informed consent.

The SL-GCPs also specifies that the father’s informed consent does not need to be obtained if any of the following applies:

The study purpose is to meet the mother’s health needs
The father’s identity or whereabouts cannot be reasonably established
The father is not reasonably available
The pregnancy is the result of rape
Further, per the SL-GCPs, no fetus in utero may be involved as a research participant unless:

The purpose of the study is to meet the health needs of the particular fetus, and the fetus will be placed at risk only to the minimum extent necessary to meet these needs
The risk to the fetus in the proposed study is minimal, and the study’s objective is to obtain biomedical knowledge that cannot be achieved by other means
According to the SL-GCPs, until it has been established whether a fetus ex utero is viable, a fetus ex utero may not be involved as a participant in any research study unless one (1) of the following conditions is met:

The fetus faces no added risk from participation in the study, and the purpose of the study is to develop biomedical knowledge that cannot be obtained by other means
The purpose of the study is to enhance the possibility of survival of the particular fetus to the point of viability
The SL-GCPs states that nonviable fetuses may not be involved as participants in any research activity unless both of these conditions are met:

The vital functions of the fetus will not be artificially maintained; experimental activities that would terminate the heartbeat or respiration of the fetus will not be employed
The purpose of the study is to acquire biomedical knowledge not otherwise obtainable
Participants engaged in the study will have no part in any decision as to timing, method, and procedures used to terminate the pregnancy, and/or determining the viability of the fetus at the pregnancy’s termination.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
The SL-GCPs indicates that the national ethics committee (EC), the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC), must pay special attention to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants, including prisoners. Prisoners are considered vulnerable because incarceration could affect their ability to make a voluntary decision regarding participation in research. A research study may only involve prisoners as participants when the EC (i.e., the SLESRC) has ensured that the clinical trial involves:

The study of the possible causes, effects, and processes of incarceration and of criminal behavior with no more than minimal risk and inconvenience to the participants
The study of prisons as institutional structures or of prisoners as incarcerated persons
Research on conditions particularly affecting prisoners as a class (e.g., vaccine trials and other research on diseases that may be more prevalent in prisons, and research on social and psychological problems such as alcoholism, drug addiction, and sexual assaults) only after appropriate experts have been consulted
Research on practices, both innovative and accepted, that have the intent and probability of improving the health or wellbeing of prisoners
In addition, per the SL-GCPs, in a study where some prisoners may be assigned to control groups that may not benefit from the research, the study may proceed only after appropriate experts have been consulted. Research that could be conducted on a population other than prisoners should not be permitted unless the EC is presented with a valid case and is convinced that the study does not represent exploitative research.

The SL-GCPs also states that when the EC reviews research involving prisoners, the following requirements must be met:

The majority of the EC members, other than prison members, must have no association with the prison(s) involved
At least one (1) member of the EC must be a prisoner, or a prisoners’ representative with appropriate background and experience to serve in that capacity. Where a research project is reviewed by more than one (1) EC, only one (1) EC need satisfy this requirement
Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
According to the SL-GCPs, the national ethics committee (EC), the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC), must pay special attention to research participants with mental disabilities, including those with psychiatric, cognitive, or developmental disorders, or participants with substance abuse related disorders. Individuals who have been institutionalized may be further compromised in terms of their capacity to make a truly voluntary decision to participate in a study.

Per the SL-GCPs, research involving people with mental disabilities or with substance abuse related disorders must therefore:

Be relevant to mental disabilities or substance abuse related disorders so that it is necessary to involve people who have a mental disability and/or a substance abuse related disorder(s)
Justify the involvement, as the study population, of institutionalized people with mental disabilities
Ensure appropriate evaluation procedures for ascertaining the participants’ ability to provide informed consent. If participants are deemed unable to understand and make a choice, then consent should be obtained from the participant’s legal representative/guardian
Ensure that consent is free from coercion and risk to participants
Ensure that only minimal risk is involved, and that the risk is outweighed by the anticipated benefits for the participants and by the importance of the knowledge that will be derived from the research
In addition, the SL-GCPs notes that persons with intellectual or mental impairment should not participate in research that might be conducted equally well with individuals without those impairments. Consent cannot be given that is contrary to the interests of a participant with mental or intellectual impairment, and the person's refusal to participate in research must always be respected. Accordingly, consent must be obtained from one (1) of the following:

The participant to the extent that the participant is competent to give informed consent
The participant’s legal representative/guardian when the participant is deemed not competent to do so
An authority, organization, or individual legally authorized to do so
The SL-GCPs further states that research involving participants with impaired capacity to communicate also requires special attention. The distinguishing features of research involving participants with impaired capacity to communicate include acute impairment states requiring medical care, as well as non-acute states. In acute impairment states, the condition and medical care may mask the participant’s degree of cognition and require different means of expression. In non-acute impairment states, the condition may prevent the participant from expressing wishes at all.

As indicated in the SL-GCPs, research involving unconscious persons requires consent to be provided by the participant’s legal representative/guardian, including any relevant statutory authorities, on that person’s behalf. Because of their extreme vulnerability, unconscious persons should be excluded from all but minimally invasive observational research. When neither the prospective participant nor the legal representative/guardian is able to give consent in advance, the EC (i.e., the SLESRC) may approve a research project without prior consent if it is satisfied that:

Inclusion in the trial is not contrary to the interests of the participant
The research is intended to be therapeutic and poses no more risk than is inherent to the participant’s condition or would be caused by alternative methods of treatment
The participant and the legal representative/guardian will be informed as soon as is reasonably possible of the participant’s inclusion in the study and of the option to withdraw from the research project at any time
The research is based on valid scientific hypotheses and offers a realistic possibility of benefit over standard care
Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
As delineated in the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs, an investigational product (IP) is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes a product with a marketing authorization when it is used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form, when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Manufacturing

As set forth in the PDA2001, the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of all drug products in Sierra Leone. According to the SL-GCPs, the sponsor must ensure that the investigational product (IP) is manufactured in accordance with applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP).

The G-SLAppClinTrial states that a GMP certificate from the national competent authority of the country of origin is required when the IP has no marketing authorization in Sierra Leone, or has marketing authorization but its original indication is modified for the purpose of the trial. The GMP certificate should conform to the World Health Organization (WHO) format.

Import

The G-SLAppClinTrial states that the PBSL is responsible for authorizing the import of IPs. A request to import an IP may be submitted after the PBSL has approved the clinical trial application.

The G-SLAppClinTrial indicates that the import application submission must include the following documentation:

Letter stating the name/description and quantities of each IP, placebo, and trial related product to be imported as well as the details of the location where the product is coming from and details of the recipient in Sierra Leone
Certificate of analysis of IP and placebo for all batches to be imported
Lot release certificate (where applicable) for all batches to be imported
Investigator, sponsor, and recognized clinical research entity’s name and address
According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, the PBSL’s processing time for IP import permits is 10 working days. Imported IPs may be inspected by PBSL officials at the port of entry before they are released to the recognized clinical research entity. The PBSL may order for destruction or re-exportation of the IPs if it has any reason to believe that there is a protocol violation resulting in the termination of the study. See the G-SLAppClinTrial for detailed IP import requirements.

As per the G-FastReg, if a product being registered in Sierra Leone is going to be used in a clinical trial, the registration application may be expedited. If the conditions for expedited registration are fulfilled, the PBSL will process the application and communicate its decision within 21 calendar days.

Please note: Sierra Leone is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (SLE-2), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see SLE-18.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

In accordance with the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs, the Investigator’s Brochure (IB) is a compilation of the clinical and nonclinical data on the investigational product(s) (IP(s)) which is relevant to the study of the IP(s) in human participants.

As per the SL-GCPs, the sponsor is responsible for providing the investigators with an IB, and the sponsor should update the IB as significant new information becomes available. The G-SLAppClinTrial further specifies that an updated IB should be submitted at least once a year, or whenever it is updated within this period. Additional information and any changes that have been incorporated in the updated IB should be highlighted for ease of review and evaluation.

According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, the content and structure of the IB must comply with the SL-GCPs and the International Council for Harmonisation’s (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (SLE-24). Accordingly, the IB must provide coverage of the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation parameters
Non-clinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects of IP in humans (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; and regulatory and post-marketing experiences)
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator(s)
Toxicological effects in any animal species tested under a single dose study, a repeated dose study, or a special study
See the SL-GCPs and SLE-24 for detailed content guidelines.

Quality Management

According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, a good manufacturing practice (GMP) certificate from the national competent authority of the country of origin is required when the IP has no marketing authorization in Sierra Leone, or has marketing authorization but its original indication is modified for the purpose of the trial. The GMP certificate should conform to the World Health Organization (WHO) format.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Sierra Leone must comply with the requirements set forth in the G-SLAppClinTrial and the SL-GCPs. As stated in the G-SLAppClinTrial, all label information should be in English and the print should be clear, legible, and indelible.

As set forth in the G-SLAppClinTrial, the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) requires the following information be included on the labels:

Sponsor details
Pharmaceutical dosage form, route of administration, quantity of dosage units, and in the case of open trials, the name/identifier and strength/potency
Batch number
Trial reference number
Trial subject identification number
Name and address of the clinical trial site and the principal investigator
Directions for use and any warnings or precautions that may be necessary
Statement indicating “For clinical trial/research use only”
Storage conditions
Period of use (use-by date, expiry date, or re-test date as applicable), in month/year format and in a manner that avoids any ambiguity as well as date of dispensing, if applicable
Statement indicating “Keep out of reach of children” except when the product is for use in trials where the product is not taken home by participants
The SL-GCPs further states that in blinded trials, the coding system for the IP(s) should include a mechanism that permits rapid identification of the product(s) in case of a medical emergency, but does not permit undetectable breaks of the blinding.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

As delineated in the SL-GCPs, the sponsor must supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the investigational product(s) (IP(s)). The sponsor should not supply either party with the IP(s) until obtaining approval from the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL).

The SL-GCPs specifies that the sponsor must:

Ensure timely delivery of the IP(s) to the investigator(s)
Maintain records that document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP(s)
Maintain a system for retrieving IPs and documenting this retrieval
Maintain a system for the disposition of unused IP(s) and documenting this disposition
Take steps to ensure IP stability over the period of use
Maintain sufficient quantities of the IP(s) to reconfirm specifications, if needed, and maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics
Ensure the IP is manufactured according to any applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP)
Ensure proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP(s)
Refer to the SL-GCPs for detailed sponsor-related IP requirements.

Per the SL-GCPs, the IP(s) should be packaged to prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage. Additionally, per the G-SLAppClinTrial, the PBSL requires the IP packaging to comply with the following requirements:

The container in which the product is contained should be of good quality
The container and closure should be properly sealed in order to protect the product from the impact of outside environmental factors
Each sample should contain an insert
According to the G-SLAppClinTrial, the principal investigator (PI) must notify the PBSL of each consignment of IP batches received on site. The notification must include the product name(s), quantities received, and batches received. The PBSL must approve destruction of IPs, which should be carried out in such a manner that all operations may be accounted for. These documents should clearly identify, or allow traceability to, the batches and/or participant numbers involved, and the actual quantities destroyed. A destruction certificate will be issued by the PBSL.

Record Requirements

The G-SLAppClinTrial indicates that for IPs purchased locally, the PI must document the source, proof of purchase, quantities purchased, and the Certificate of Analysis for each batch of IPs. Copies of all documents on the IP(s), whether purchased locally or imported, must be kept on site for verification and accountability during good clinical practice (GCP) inspections.

As per the SL-GCPs, the sponsor should retain all sponsor-specific essential documents in conformance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s) of the country(ies) where the product is approved, and/or where the sponsor intends to apply for approval(s). All sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained for at least two (2) years after formal discontinuation of the trial or in conformance with applicable regulatory requirements. In addition, all clinical and experimental data (electronic or paper) should be kept in a secure place for a period of five (5) years, and 20 years for a new drug application after a trial’s completion, and be readily available for review upon request by the PBSL.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
In Sierra Leone, a specimen is referred to as a biological specimen or a biological sample. As delineated in the G-SLAppClinTrial, a biological specimen or a biological sample is defined as material derived from various animal and human sources (e.g., blood, tissues, and cells) used to treat and prevent diseases.

SLE-1 further defines biological material as original material, progeny, and unmodified derivatives, but not new intellectual property. The terms referenced in this definition are explained as follows:

Progeny refers to an unmodified descendant from the original material, such as a virus from a virus, a cell from a cell, or an organism from an organism
Unmodified derivatives refer to substances and other materials created by the recipient that constitute an unmodified functional subunit or product expressed by the original material, including subclones of unmodified cell lines, purified or fractionated subsets of the original material, proteins expressed by DNA/RNA supplied by the provider, or monoclonal antibodies secreted by a hybridoma cell line
New intellectual property includes the following:

Modifications (but not the material that is contained or incorporated therein)
Other substances and materials created by the recipient through the use of the material or modifications, but that are not progeny, unmodified derivatives, or modifications (i.e., do not contain the original material, progeny, or unmodified derivatives)
Any new use of the material, modifications, or the substances and materials created by the recipient, and
Any new or improved process, method, or technique conceived or developed by the recipient through the use of the material, modifications, or the substances and materials previously described
Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
According to the G-SLAppClinTrial and SLE-23, the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) is responsible for authorizing the import and export of all biological specimens in Sierra Leone. However, the G-SLAppClinTrial does not have any additional information regarding specimens import.

Export

As set forth in the G-SLAppClinTrial, all institutions or individuals that wish to export any clinical information, medical records, and/or biological samples from Sierra Leone to an institution outside of the country must complete the PBSL’s requirements for material transfer authorization. The sponsor must provide annual updates on the use of, and results obtained from, biological samples exported out of Sierra Leone.

Per the G-SLAppClinTrial and the G-MTA, the local principal investigator or study lead must submit an application for an export permit submitted through the Ministry of Health and Sanitation (MoHS) to the PBSL. All applications must be accompanied by the following documents:

Evidence of informed consent for use of medical records, clinical information, and biological samples from living participants
MoHS authorization for deceased patients
Memorandum of understanding (MOU) between MoHS and the applicant
Signed and dated Material Transfer Agreement (MTA)
Payment of PBSL prescribed export permit fee
Please refer to SLE-1 for the materials transfer template.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 7, 2025
In accordance with the G-SLAppClinTrial, consent forms for the research protocol should include a separate section for trial participants who are requested to provide their consent for the use of their biological specimens for research purposes. Separate consent may be appropriate in some cases (e.g., if investigators are requesting permission to conduct basic research which is not a necessary part of the trial), but not in others (e.g., the trial requires the use of participants’ biological materials).

As per the G-SLAppClinTrial, medical records and biological specimens taken in the course of clinical care may be used for research without the consent of the participants only if an ethics committee (EC) (i.e., the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC)) has determined that the research poses minimal risk, that the rights or interests of the participants will not be violated, that their privacy and confidentiality or anonymity are assured, and that the research is designed to answer an important question and would be impracticable if the requirement for informed consent were to be imposed. Participants have a right to know that their records or specimens may be used for research. Records or specimens should not be used when patients/participants refuse to give their permission unless the records are being used to aid in public health emergencies.

As set forth in the G-SLAppClinTrial, if informed consent or permission was required to authorize the original collection or use of such records or specimens for research purposes, then the secondary use of this information will generally be limited by the conditions specified in the original consent. During the initial consent process, prospective participants should be informed about the following potential uses of their records or specimens:

Whether there will or may be secondary use of their research records or biological specimens, and whether this use will be limited to specific types of studies
The conditions under which the investigators will be required to contact the participants for additional authorization for secondary use
The investigators’ plans, if any, to destroy or to strip the records or specimens of personal identifiers
The participants’ rights to request that their specimens or records be destroyed or personal identifiers removed for those parts of the records that they might consider to be particularly sensitive, such as photographs, videotapes, or audiotapes
In addition, per SLE-1, the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) requires the recipient of the transferred original materials to agree to treat the material and provider information as confidential except when the material or information falls under the following conditions:

It is in the public domain at the time it is received by the recipient
It enters the public domain after the recipient’s receipt other than through the recipient’s breach of the Materials Transfer Agreement (MTA)
The recipient can show that the material or information was, prior to receipt from the provider, lawfully in the recipient’s possession and therefore the recipient is not obligated to maintain confidentiality
The recipient can demonstrate the material or information was independently developed by employees, agents, or consultants of the recipient without any knowledge or use of the information disclosed by the provider under the MTA
It was approved in writing by the provider for disclosure, provided that such disclosure was made by the recipient in accordance with the terms of such approval
SLE-1 further states that during the period of use and for five (5) years after, the recipient will use reasonable effort to maintain the confidentiality of the material and provider information covered by the MTA. To this end, the recipient will not, directly or indirectly, deal with, use, exploit, or disclose the material or provider information to any person or entity for any purpose other than those established in the MTA, or, unless the provider expressly authorizes the recipient to do so in writing. If the recipient is required by judicial, administrative, or any other legal process to provide or disclose the materials or provider information, the recipient will promptly notify the provider and allow the provider reasonable time to oppose the process prior to taking action.

See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent.

Requirements
(Legislation) The Pharmacy and Drugs Act, 2001 (PDA2001) (December 13, 2001)
Parliament, Republic of Sierra Leone
(Guidance) A Guide for Safety Monitoring of Medicines in Sierra Leone (G-SLSftyMntrng) (Version 02) (Effective February 17, 2021)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Guidance) Good Clinical Practice Guidelines (SL-GCPs) (Version 02) (Effective February 17, 2021)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Guidance) Guide for the Inspection of Clinical Trials (G-SLInspect) (Version 02) (Effective February 17, 2021)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Guidance) Guideline for Material Transfer Agreement (G-MTA) (Version 01) (Effective January 10, 2019)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Guidance) Guidelines for Application and Authorisation of Clinical Trials of Medicines, Vaccines, Medical Devices and Food Supplements in Sierra Leone (G-SLAppClinTrial) (Version 02) (Effective February 17, 2021)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Guidance) Guidelines for Registration of Biosimilar Products (G-SLBiosimilar) (Version 02) (Effective February 17, 2021)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Expedited Registration of Medical Products (G-FastReg) (Version 02) (Effective February 17, 2021)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Guidance) Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee – Application Guidelines and Checklist (G-SLEthics) (2017)
Office of the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee, Ministry of Health and Sanitation, and Directorate of Policy, Planning & Information
Additional Resources
(Document) Attachment Number 4: Functions of the Pharmacy Board Department (SLE-4) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Document) Materials Transfer Template (SLE-1) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (SLE-2) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) Sierra Leone National Research for Health Policy 2021-2031 (SLE-3) (Date Unavailable)
Ministry of Health and Sanitation
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (SLE-5) (December 13, 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline - Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (SLE-11) (Step 4 Version) (November 30, 1995)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (SLE-24) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with the Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone (PBSL) (November 2024) (SLE-23)
(Webpage) Country Profile: Sierra Leone (SLE-18) (Current as of January 7, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) ICH Efficacy Guidelines (SLE-12) (Current as of January 7, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (SLE-19) (Current as of January 7, 2025)
Pan African Clinical Trials Registry
(Webpage) Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone - Mandate (SLE-22) (Current as of January 7, 2025)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Webpage) Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone - Pharmacovigilance & Clinical Trials (SLE-15) (Current as of January 7, 2025)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Webpage) Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone - Report Adverse Drug Reaction (SLE-14) (Current as of January 7, 2025)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Webpage) Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone - Vision and Mission (SLE-13) (Current as of January 7, 2025)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
Forms
(Form) CIOMS Form I (SLE-7) (Date Unavailable)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(Form) PBSL Clinical Trial Application Checklist PBSL-F-78/02 (SLE-9) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Form) PBSL Clinical Trial Application for Protocol Amendment Checklist (PBSL-F-79/01) (SLE-8) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
(Form) PBSL Clinical Trial Application Form PBSL-F-78/01 (SLE-6) (Date Unavailable)
Pharmacy Board of Sierra Leone
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

South Africa
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
This message was updated on January 13, 2026
Updated SAHPRA GMP Guidelines

On November 17, 2025, the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) issued version 9 of the Guidelines to Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicines, which aligns with Pharmaceutical Inspection Cooperation Scheme (PIC/S) Annex 16.

Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority

As stated in the MRSA and ZAF-9, the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) is the regulatory authority overseeing medicines and clinical research, as well as medical devices and radiation safety. As stated in the MRSA and GRMRSA, SAHPRA is responsible for clinical trial oversight, approval, and inspections in South Africa. The agency grants permission for clinical trials to be conducted in South Africa in accordance with the provisions of the GRMRSA.

Per the MRSA and ZAF-39, the SAHPRA is an independent, state-owned entity established to oversee the regulation of medicines in South Africa. According to ZAF-39, this agency is responsible for:

The regulation of health products intended for human and animal use
The licensing of manufacturers, wholesalers, and distributors of medicines and medical devices; radiation emitting devices; and radioactive nuclides
The conduct of clinical trials in a manner that is compatible with national medicines policy
Per the MRSA, SAHPRA is a state-owned entity within the public administration but outside the public service. It acts through a Board appointed by South Africa’s Minister of the National Department of Health (NDOH). For details on the Board appointments, see ZAF-39 and ZAF-38.

As described in ZAF-39 and the SA-GCPs, SAHPRA is tasked with regulating (monitoring, evaluating, investigating, inspecting, and registering) all health products. This includes clinical trials, complementary medicines, medical devices, and in vitro diagnostics (IVDs). Its mission is to promote access to health products and protect human and animal health in South Africa through science-based regulatory decisions. Per ZAF-36, SAHPRA’s Clinical Trial Committee (CTC), within the Clinical Trial Unit, reviews clinical trial applications and bioequivalence studies for human participants and recommends approval of the conduct of clinical trials. SAHPRA also authorizes the importation of unregistered medicine for the purpose of conducting clinical trials. The SA-GCPs also states that SAHPRA is responsible for the following: ensuring efficient, effective, and ethical evaluation or assessment of health products that meet defined standards of quality, safety, efficacy, and performance; ensuring that the process of evaluating or assessing and registering health products is transparent, fair, objective, and concluded in a timely fashion; ensuring periodic re-evaluation and monitoring of health products; and conducting announced and unannounced inspections.

Other Considerations

Please note: South Africa is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (ZAF-8), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see ZAF-34.

Contact Information

Per ZAF-35, SAHPRA’s postal address is:

South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
Private Bag X828
Pretoria
0001
South Africa

SAHPRA’s physical address is:

Building A
Loftus Park
402 Kirkness Street
Arcadia, Pretoria
South Africa

As provided in the G-CTA-Electronic and ZAF-36, the following are the SAHPRA Clinical Trial Unit emails:

New clinical trials application alert, responses to new clinical trial applications and related queries: ctcresponses@sahpra.org.za
Protocol amendments, responses to amendments and related queries: ctcamendments@sahpra.org.za
Additional investigators and sites, responses to additional and related queries: ctcinvestigators@sahpra.org.za
Bioequivalence (BE) studies, BE amendments, responses to BE studies and related queries: ctcbeprotocols@sahpra.org.za
Notifications and related queries: ctcnotifications@sahpra.org.za
Individual patient serious adverse events and related queries: ctcsaes@sahpra.org.za
Guidelines, forms, and related queries: ctcguidelines@sahpra.org.za

See ZAF-47 for clinical evaluation and management contacts.

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the GRMRSA, the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) is responsible for reviewing and approving all clinical trial applications for an unregistered medicine, and for any new indication or dosage regimen of a registered medicine. The scope of the SAHPRA’s assessment includes all clinical trials (Phases I-IV) and bioequivalence/bioavailability studies. Per ZAF-23, the review and approval of clinical trial applications by SAHPRA and a registered ethics committee (EC) may be conducted in parallel. However, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF recommends that scientific review be completed prior to ethics review, and in cases where scientific review capacity is not available, the EC approval should be delayed until SAHPRA scientific approval has been provided.

ZAF-36 states that the SAHPRA’s Clinical Trial Unit (CTU) provides the legal framework for the review of clinical trials and bioequivalence studies for human participants and recommends approval of the conduct of clinical trials. The unit also authorizes the importation of unregistered medicines for the purpose of conducting clinical trials. As per G-GenInfo, the CTU is responsible for the evaluation of clinical trial applications, clinical trial amendments, and adverse event reports arising from a clinical trial.

Clinical Trial Review Process

Per ZAF-36, the CTU of SAHPRA receives, processes, and evaluates clinical trial applications and any subsequent amendments for approval to conduct a study within South Africa. Researchers must submit a completed application and the prescribed fee on predetermined dates (ZAF-11). The proof of delivery, proof of payments, and cover page must be sent to SAHPRA via email.

As stated in ZAF-36, the CTU completes a preliminary screening of the application and sends an official letter to the applicant with the outcome and follow-up questions on a screening checklist. As indicated in ZAF-23, incomplete documentation or sub-standard submissions will be rejected. Additionally, applications submitted without clinical trial insurance will be rejected. Applicants will be allowed a maximum of two (2) rounds of queries to respond to, and if the responses are not satisfactory, the application will be rejected. Per ZAF-36, if an application is rejected, no response is required; the screening checklist should be used as guidance for resubmission during the next review cycle. Next, the CTU’s Clinical Trial Committee (CTC) (which includes an expert committee of specialists, as needed) reviews the proposed clinical trials pursuant to the schedule on SAHPRA’s website. (See ZAF-11 for 2026 dates). Per ZAF-1, clinical trial reviews will result in one (1) of the following outcomes:

Category 1A: Approved; no items pending
Category 1B: Approved; ethics approval pending
Category 2A: Not approved; for approval by in-house evaluators, 1-2 or more items outstanding as deemed by the committee
Category 2B: Not approved; for approval by the original evaluator and in-house if a need arises
Category 3: Not approved; items outstanding to be discussed at the next CTC meeting
Category 4: Not approved; for referral for specialist opinion
Category 5: Not approved – technical/scientific deficiencies; applicant to resubmit for the next cycle
Category 6: Rejected due to administrative and technical items outstanding; applicant to resubmit for the next cycle
If an applicant would like to request a meeting with the CTC, the request should be submitted through the SAHPRA Chief Executive Office pursuant to the procedures in the G-ConsultMtg.

Other Considerations

Per the G-Capacity, SAHPRA will also review clinical trial applications for evidence of plans to build capacity at each study site as well as enhancing research activities and skills of professionals from historically disadvantaged groups. See G-Capacity for detailed information on actions that will comply with this requirement.

In addition, see G-Clin for South Africa's use of a “reliance model” to register medicines based on clinical trial data from other regulatory authorities.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 31, 2025
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority

Per the MRSA, the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) is authorized to make regulations to collect fees for its various medicine regulatory functions. As delineated in ZAF-37, applicants are responsible for paying several fees to submit a clinical trial application. MRSA-Fees, per Fees-Info, delineates the following fees:

For a clinical trial application for the authorization of the use of unregistered medicines:

Clinical trial application (safety and efficacy): South African Rand (R)33 700
Clinical trial application (bioequivalence study): R31 700
Clinical trial application (postgraduate study) with pharmaceutical company involvement: R11 200
Phase 4 clinical trial application and any other clinical trial application, including university-involved postgraduate qualification and/or pre-consultation of clinical trials: R5 100
For amendments to clinical trials:

Technical amendment applications: R7 200
Administrative amendment applications: R4 200
Any other application except for the purpose of performing a clinical trial: R400
For licenses:

New manufacturing license: R26 200
New import/export license to the holder of certificate of registration: R15 600
Renewal of manufacturing license: R22 900
Renewal of import license to the holder of the certificate of registration: R9 600
Renewal of export license to the holder of the certificate of registration: R9 600
Annual retention of all licenses: R4 400
For inspections to assess the quality, safety, and efficacy of medicines:

Manufacturing sites: R1 660 per hour per inspector, plus reimbursement for travel time
Desktop inspection, including good practice compliance status after license amendments: R2 200 per day per inspector
Payment Instructions

Per the G-SAHPRAFees, SAHPRA has initiated a process to phase in an electronic application system through various Application Portals that will create unique reference numbers for the application and relevant payment. (NIAID will monitor these developments and update the profile, as needed.). When making payments, applicants should follow these guidelines:

Applicants should submit a cover page that identifies the services requested using the template provided in ZAF-37
Payments should be referenced in accordance with the SAHPRA Fee Categorization Guideline (Annexure A of G-SAHPRAFees)
If the applicable bank limits reference spacing, follow the sequence listed in Annexure A as far as the limitation allows; spacing and dashes (/) may be omitted
Fee payments may be transferred directly into the bank account of SAHPRA via an electronic or manual deposit process
No check payments will be accepted
For administrative control purposes, applicants should make one (1) payment per service
Payment should only be made once the application and required dossiers are ready for submission
Payments do not have to be made upon request of an application number; however, the applications and required dossiers should be submitted within a reasonable time upon receipt of an application number or as specified in the relevant application guidelines
As soon as the fee payment has been made, the proof of payment and cover page should be attached and sent via email to SAHPRA Finance at pop@sahpra.org.za, and the relevant unit(s) processing the application should be copied on the email.
If the proof of payment has not been submitted, or no details to identify the payment reference as per the G-SAHPRAFees have been provided, and any further attempts to clear these payments fail after 12 months, any liability for SAHPRA to refund these payments will be forfeited
If a payment has been received without an application, the applicant will be notified to submit the required application within 14 working days, failing which, the amount will be forfeited
Requests for refunds should be submitted in line with Annex B in the G-SAHPRAFees
Payment and pro forma invoice queries and requests can be directed to finance@sahpra.org.za or 012 501 0323
See the G-SAHPRAFees for details on special requests for extensions to the deadline
Per the G-SAHPRAFees, the bank and account details are as follows:

Account name: South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
Special Name: The Medicines Control Council
Account type: Cheque/Current Account
Account number: 40-5939-2080
Bank: ABSA
Bank Branch Code: 632005
Bank physical address: 240 Vermeulen Street, Pretoria, 0001, South Africa
Swift Code: ABSAZAJJ

Fee payment questions can be directed to finance@sahpra.org.za or 012 501 0470.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Overview

As stipulated in the NHA, ethics committees (ECs) in South Africa are governed by the National Health Research Ethics Council (NHREC), which is a statutory body established under the NHA. NHREC determines guidelines for the functioning of ECs and registers and audits ECs, among other functions. Further, according to the NHA and ZAF-52, NHREC gives direction on ethical issues relating to health and develops guidelines for the conduct of research involving humans and animals. As delineated in the NHA, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, and the SA-GCPs, all ECs are required to register with the NHREC in order to undertake the ethical review of a clinical study.

The NHA and the G-EthicsHR-ZAF require that every institution, health agency, and health establishment at which research is conducted establish an EC or have access to an independent EC that is registered with the NHREC. Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, researchers without affiliation to an institution or organization with an EC should approach a registered EC to request it to review their health research protocols.

Ethics Committee Composition

As delineated in the SA-GCPs and the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, an EC must consist of members who collectively encompass the qualifications and experience required to review and evaluate the scientific, medical, and ethical aspects of all proposed research studies. Further, per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, ECs should be independent, multidisciplinary, multi-sectoral, and pluralistic. In general terms, membership should include the following:

As many disciplines, sectors, and professions as possible, appropriate to the remit of the specific EC
Members from diverse age groups and academic or professional ranks
Ethnically and culturally diverse members and an appropriate mix of genders
Lay persons
Researchers who do not conduct human participant research or animal use research
The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that subject to institutional requirements, a chairperson could be appointed or elected at the first meeting of a newly constituted EC. Alternatively, the chairperson could be appointed by the institutional leadership for a period of three (3) to five (5) years, renewable once, if so specified in the terms of reference. The chairperson must have experience in research methodology and research ethics, should have at least two (2) years’ experience as an EC member and should have leadership experience. If the chairperson is an external appointee, the institution must provide the chairperson with the necessary support and authority to perform the role. The chairperson should be assisted by at least one (1) deputy chairperson, who is elected by the EC members and assists the chairperson and serves as the role of chairperson when necessary.

As delineated in the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the composition of ECs should promote optimal human participant welfare, research integrity (including data robustness and scientific validity), defendable significance of proposed research questions (including translatability of scientific findings into practice, where applicable), as well as legal, professional, and regulatory compliance. All EC members should have documented proof (i.e., evidence) of research ethics training, refreshed at least once. EC membership should consist of:

A minimum of nine (9) members with a quorum being a simple majority; where the number of members is more than 15, the quorum may be 33%
At least one (1) layperson
At least one (1) member with knowledge of, and current experience in, the professional care, counselling, or health-related treatment of people, (e.g., a social worker, nurse, psychologist, or medical practitioner)
At least one (1) member with professional training and experience in qualitative research methodologies
Members with professional training and experience in quantitative research methodologies
A member with expertise in biostatistics
A member with expertise in research ethics
At least one (1) member who is legally qualified and has extensive knowledge of family law, health law, and research ethics
Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, when appointing EC members, institutions should be mindful of the need for ECs to develop institutional memory among the membership as well as to ensure succession planning. Members of ECs should be appointed formally for periods of three (3) to five (5) years, renewable once, after which the member should step down for at least one (1) term. Appointments should overlap so that no more than half the committee membership is new at any one appointment time. ECs should have standard operating procedures (SOP) that specify meeting attendance expectations, possible sanctions if attendance is poor, expectations for promptness of reviews, preparation for meetings, agenda, minutes, etc. ECs must define the review timelines in their SOPs. The appointment letter should describe the essential expectations of membership. ECs should provide induction training for new members that includes discussion of the role of EC members, the code of conduct, expectations of integrity, and confidentiality. Each EC should also have terms of reference that include the delegated and inherent authority as well as the scope of the EC's authority, its responsibilities, its relationship to non-affiliated researchers, its accountability responsibilities, and the mechanisms for reporting and remuneration, if any, for members. See the G-EthicsHR-ZAF for a sample terms of reference.

In addition, per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, EC members are expected to familiarize themselves with the institutional documentation, as well as the national and relevant international research ethics guidelines, and should have documented proof of such familiarity, e.g., an assessment of training certificate, not a mere attendance certificate. See the G-EthicsHR-ZAF for additional training requirements. The SA-GCPs stipulate that EC members who review clinical trial proposals should have research ethics training and good clinical practice training, evidenced by certificates issued in the last three (3) years.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that it is important for ECs to have clear SOPs that clarify the expectations about EC members’ review responsibilities. For EC meetings, the quorum should be a simple majority, and where the number of members is more than 15, the quorum may be 33%.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, institutions must have a Code of Conduct for EC members, which details the conduct and integrity expectations of members, including regular and punctual attendance at meetings, diligent performance of responsibilities, maintenance of confidentiality, and management of potential conflicts of interest. The induction process for new members should require that they sign the Code of Conduct to indicate they know and understand the expectations. (See A2.6 Code of Conduct for REC members sample.) Institutions must also ensure there is a formal appointment letter for EC members that sets out the term of office and the assurance that members are indemnified from personal liability against claims that may arise in the course of ordinary business of the EC.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, ECs should correspond primarily with the principal investigator (PI) or a delegated signatory, and not with the sponsor unless dictated by specific circumstances. EC members should disclose information that may lead to potential, actual, and perceptions of conflict of interest. EC members should not review or make decisions about research protocols in which they are involved personally (including as supervisor of a student) or financially. When such a protocol is to be discussed, the member concerned must declare the potential conflict and offer to recuse themselves from the meeting for that time. Should the member be permitted to remain for the discussion at the discretion of the chairperson (e.g., to facilitate clarifications), the member must leave the meeting for the duration of the final decision-making discussion concerning the application in question. EC members and ad hoc reviewers must not use the ethics review process to impose personal biases, professional jealousy, or territorial protection conduct about an applicant's protocol, including about research methods or the topic. If applicants pay fees for the ethics review service, this must not negatively affect the rigor of reviews, the integrity of the process, or the capacity to monitor the research that the EC approves. The EC should be alert to whether an advocate for special interest groups of participants proposed for specific research would add value to the review process for informed responsible decision-making in the context. The EC should be alert to the potential for poor consent processes in the absence of appropriately translated materials and the availability of interpreters.

Regarding archiving and record keeping, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that ECs should keep written records of all research protocols received for review, including information sheets, consent forms, and relevant correspondence, in the form in which they were approved. Electronic records are acceptable, provided the signatures, especially on the finally approved documentation, are properly documented and included in the record. EC records must provide a reliable and authoritative record of the business of the EC that will stand up to scrutiny in the event of queries, conflict, and audit. The record should include at least the following:

Name of PI
Protocol identification number
Title of the project
Date of approval or rejection
Duration of approval period (maximum 12 months, renewable)
Conditions of approval, if applicable
Whether approval was expedited
Copy of the signed final protocol or protocol approved
Whether and how consultation occurred
Records of adverse events
Records of amendments
Reports of adverse and serious adverse events and action taken
Other relevant information such as complaints from participants
Per the SA-GCPs, the EC should retain all relevant records for a period of at least three (3) years or as per institutional requirement, whichever period is longer, after completion of the trial and make them available upon request from the applicable regulatory authority.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Overview

Per the SA-GCPs, clinical trials should be conducted in accordance with all ethical principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki (ZAF-44) and consistent with good clinical practice and other applicable regulatory requirements. In accordance with the NHA, the SA-GCPs, and the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, ethics committees (ECs) must evaluate the ethical and scientific rigor of all research studies to be conducted in the country. An EC’s primary responsibilities are to (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Review protocols to ensure that research involving human participants has scientific merit and will promote health, and prevent or cure disability and disease; in addition, ensure the research has social merit in light of South Africa’s research priorities or is otherwise justified
Ensure clinical trials are governed by the ethical principles of beneficence and non-maleficence, distributive justice (equity), and respect for persons (dignity and autonomy)
Uphold the key norms for ethical research with human participants including relevance and value; scientific integrity; stakeholder engagement; fair selection of participants; informed consent; ongoing respect for enrolled participants; and researcher competence and expertise
Grant approval for research where the protocols meet the ethical standards of the institution, agency, or establishment
Determine whether and why randomization is relevant, and how this is addressed
Evaluate the appropriateness of the inclusion/exclusion criteria and the recruitment process in the South African context
Ensure the feasibility of obtaining meaningful results with the lowest possible risk of harm for participants and whether the risk of harm is appropriately weighed against anticipated benefits for participants or the class of persons from which they are drawn; high risk of harm may be justifiable where the anticipated benefit is of high importance to increase relevant knowledge and appropriate mitigating measures are in place to minimize harm to participants; and attention must be given to harms and benefits beyond the life of the trial itself, especially in respect to early phase studies and (pharmacovigilance) surveillance for chronic and life-threatening conditions
Protect the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable (See the Informed Consent topic for additional information about these populations).
Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the SA-GCPs, and the NHAParticipants, the principal investigator (PI) or the sponsor must submit a clinical trial application to both the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) and a registered EC for review and approval before a study may commence. Per ZAF-23, the review and approval of clinical trial applications by SAHPRA and a registered EC may be conducted in parallel. However, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF recommends that scientific review be completed prior to ethics review and, in cases where scientific review capacity is not available, the EC approval should be delayed until SAHPRA scientific approval has been provided. Further, where site permissions are required, e.g., from Provincial Health Research Committees (PHRCs) or superintendents, to conduct research in health care facilities, ECs must delay granting full approval until these permissions are received. This is to prevent research from beginning before the facility knows it will happen.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF indicates that after the deliberative review process, the EC should approve, require amendment to, or reject a research protocol. In considering a research protocol, the EC may seek assistance from experts who have no conflicts of interest. EC decisions should be recorded in writing and appropriately documented in the minutes. A decision to approve should include the conditions (e.g., the duration of the approval, the reporting requirements, etc.). Reasons for a decision to require an amendment or to reject a research protocol should be recorded and provide sufficient feedback to the applicant. Outright rejection should be avoided if a researcher can be advised to improve the protocol. Researchers should be encouraged to address the concerns and improve their protocols. In addition, feedback should include the expected return date to minimize delays to finalize the approval process. The maximum time for a return date should not exceed six (6) months. Should the applicant exceed the stipulated return date without communication to the EC, the application should be removed from the agenda, and a new application must be submitted. ECs should require researchers to report immediately if a project is terminated or suspended before the anticipated date of completion. ECs should require researchers to report immediately anything that might warrant reconsideration of ethical approval of the protocol, including but not limited to:

Serious or unexpected adverse effects on participants
Proposed changes in the protocol
Unforeseen events that might affect continued ethical acceptability of the project
Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, to prevent unnecessary duplication of work, ECs may, at their own discretion, recognize the review and approval of a research protocol granted by another registered South African EC. Reciprocal recognition means that two (2) or more registered ECs decide to recognize each other’s review. This arrangement may involve formal agreements between the ECs explaining how the workload and responsibilities are shared and the basis on which recognition occurs. Alternatively, the committee may decide to use reciprocity recognition on a case-by-case basis. ECs that recognize reciprocal review agree on the nature of the documents to be filed at each office. The expectation is that ECs should communicate with each other, through their chairpersons, and agree on a way forward regarding review of a multi-site protocol when it is desirable to avoid duplication of effort. The possibility of reciprocal recognition of reviews should occur in a collaborative, harmonious manner, bearing in mind that each EC retains the responsibility of protecting the safety, rights, and interests of participants enrolled in the studies it has approved. For more details on reciprocal review, see the G-EthicsHR-ZAF.

The SA-GCPs requires the EC’s approval of the following before the clinical trial may begin: protocol and any amendments; case report form, if applicable; informed consent form(s); any other written information to be provided to the participants; advertisement for participant recruitment (if used); participant compensation; and any other documents given approval/favorable opinion.

The SA-GCPs mandate that the sponsor receive confirmation of EC review from the investigator(s) or institution(s). The sponsor must receive the following information prior to the trial’s commencement:

The name and address of the relevant EC registered with National Health Research Ethics Council (NHREC), with its documented approval
If EC approval is conditional on required modifications, a copy of the modification(s) made and the date the final approval was granted by the EC
Documentation and dates of any EC re-approvals/re-evaluations
Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF and ZAF-20, if there is an amendment to the protocol, the sponsor must notify the EC and get its approval. This approval should be sent to the SAHPRA using the Application for Protocol Amendment to an Approved Trial (ZAF-20).

As delineated in the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, ECs have the right to monitor the research it approves. The frequency and type of monitoring should reflect the degree and extent of risk of harm to participants. Monitoring types include passive and active measures. Active monitoring requires a site visit. Passive monitoring is generally paper, using reports and other information. A site visit is expected for investigation of adverse events, serious adverse events for high-risk research, as well as other occurrences that prompt concerns for ECs. The EC should ensure that appropriate feedback is given to the PI, with an opportunity to address any identified gaps within a negotiated timeline. ECs may recommend and adopt any additional appropriate mechanism for monitoring, including random inspection of research sites, welfare monitoring sheets, data and signed consent forms, and records of interviews. ECs should ensure information and consent materials indicate that such monitoring may take place. Further, ECs should request regular, at least annual, reports from PIs. See the G-EthicsHR-ZAF for more details including the report requirements.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that where circumstances indicate that a project is non-compliant with the approved protocol and the interests of participants are at risk of harm, the EC may withdraw approval, after due process has been followed. A clear process should be followed that permits swift but proper investigation and decision-making to ensure protection of participants. The investigation should include interaction with the researchers and other interested parties to ensure a fair and transparent process. If the decision is to withdraw approval, the EC should inform the PI and other interested parties, including the institutional authorities, and recommend suspension (temporary stoppage) or termination (permanent stoppage) of the project. It should also recommend remedial action where appropriate. In the case of suspension, the PI must comply with the recommendations and any special conditions imposed by the EC.

Expedited Review

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, expedited review applies, in principle, only to research that poses no more than minimal risk of harm. Generally, expedited review means that no fewer than two (2) EC members review the protocol and that deliberation in the full committee meeting is foregone, unless the reviewers believe there are issues that the EC should discuss. The nature of research that may be expedited should be described in the procedures. The outcomes of the expedited review process must be reported to the full committee, at least by being noted on the agenda, so that the record is complete.

Rapid Review

As delineated in the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, rapid review process permits rapid but thorough processing of ethics review applications in circumstances that require accelerated preparation for a research study or project, for example when there is a national or localized emergency. The EC should carefully assess the nature of the research to determine the appropriate review process, bearing in mind that not all research during a major incident is necessarily urgent. Careful ethical reflection is essential, notwithstanding any perceived urgency. All the usual ethical norms and standards must be considered. The EC should have a review standard operating procedure (SOP) that allows a combination of rapid but thorough review and reciprocal recognition of review (see above) by other registered ECs. The SOP might stipulate that a small group of reviewers (3-5 persons) with appropriate expertise reviews the protocol. The deliberations and outcome of the process must be documented in minutes and reported to the full EC at its next meeting.

Joint Review

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF allows joint reviews wherein two (2) or more ECs review a multi-site research protocol together. The sites may be within South Africa or may include sites elsewhere on the African continent. A joint review is not the same as a reciprocally recognized review (described above). A joint review entails members of the ECs concerned communicating virtually or face-to-face to discuss their respective reviews and queries and come to conclusions. The joint review process permits efficiency of reviews, facilitation of capacity building, development of trust, and avoids unnecessary repetition of administrative work. When deliberations are completed and a decision to approve has been reached, each EC uses its own approval SOPs and processes. Joint review does not exempt any of the ECs involved from their responsibilities, including monitoring and looking after the interests of participants at their sites. The PIs concerned are responsible for informing their institutional EC of the fact of multi-site research, as well as the names of the other ECs with jurisdiction over other research sites. This information enables the chairs of the ECs to arrange a joint meeting of the ECs involved to review, deliberate on, and approve the protocol concerned simultaneously. Joint reviews involving South African and other African ECs can be used in a similar manner to facilitate the ethics review and approval processes. A memorandum of understanding is recommended between the ECs involved that outlines the process, the expectations, and the responsibilities.

Foreign Research Collaboration

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF indicates that where international research (multi-country studies) is conducted exclusively online or the online platform is used to recruit study participants, and the PI neither lives or works in South Africa, an exemption from ethics review and approval is possible. This is on the proviso that the PI can demonstrate to a local registered EC that permission has been obtained from the website owners and that a notice of research intent is posted on the relevant website. In addition, the PI must comply with the privacy policies and terms of website use, and with personal data protection requirements in the POPIA. (See the Personal Data Protection section for more information).

Artificial Intelligence

Per G-EthicsHR-ZAF, ECs must consider the following ethical considerations when reviewing protocols that involve the use of artificial intelligence (AI):

Transparency in the context of AI necessitates openness and clarity at every phase of the research
Researchers should explain how interpretable these models are, how this interpretation is communicated to a user, and to what extent interpretation is possible
Responsibility and accountability—Researchers should have a sufficient understanding of the AI model/technology and take responsibility for its use. Information on technical engineering perspectives should be made available for the ECs conducting the review. The ethical and responsible use and deployment of AI tools remain the responsibility of the PI to ensure the protection of research participants’ data
Equity and fairness—AI tools must be designed and implemented equitably and without unfair discrimination against any individual or group. Special attention should be given to vulnerable and historically underrepresented populations. Researchers should actively involve diverse participant groups in the design and testing phases to ensure fairness and representation. Additionally, algorithms should be assessed regularly for bias, and any discovered discrepancies should be promptly addressed and rectified
Benefit sharing, with particular attention to the needs and contributions of low-income communities, should be considered. Evidence of fostering equitable and collective sharing of the benefits and burdens of research must be presented to the EC
Safety risks and well as vulnerabilities to attack (security risks) should be addressed, prevented, and eliminated throughout the lifecycle of an AI system
Researchers must prioritize safety in the implementation of AI-enabled systems, with thorough assessments of the risk of harm and strategies for mitigation
See the G-EthicsHR-ZAF for detailed guidance on the above AI considerations.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
As indicated in the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, ethics committees (ECs) may independently decide whether to charge fees for a protocol review for external researchers. Researchers without affiliation to an institution or organization with an EC should approach a registered EC to request it to review their health research protocols. If the EC is willing to review external applications, a fee for service may be levied.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Overview

As stipulated in the NHA, ethics committees (ECs) in South Africa are governed by the National Health Research Ethics Council (NHREC), which is a statutory body established under the NHA. NHREC determines guidelines for the functioning of ECs and registers and audits ECs, among other functions. The NHREC was created by the Minister of Health to provide ethical oversight of clinical research and to safeguard the rights and welfare of human participants involved in clinical studies. According to ZAF-52, NHREC gives direction on ethical issues relating to health and develops guidelines for the conduct of research involving humans and animals. Further, NHREC upholds the principle that research involving human participants is based on a moral commitment to advancing human welfare, knowledge, and understanding, and to exploring cultural dynamics, especially in large-scale trials conducted in developing countries. Of fundamental importance is the duty to conduct scientifically sound research while acting in the participant’s best interests and respecting and protecting the participant’s autonomy.

As delineated in the NHA, the SA-GCPs, and the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the NHREC’s core responsibilities center on promoting, ensuring, and monitoring compliance by ECs. According to the G-EthicsHR-ZAF and ZAF-52, the functions of the NHREC include:

Determine guidelines for the functioning of ECs
Register and audit ECs
Set norms and standards for conducting research on humans and animals including clinical trials
Adjudicate complaints about the functioning of ECs
Refer to the relevant statutory health professional council matters involving the violation or potential violation of an ethical or professional rule by a health care provider
Institute such disciplinary action as prescribed
Advise the national department and provincial departments on any ethical issues concerning research
Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

As delineated in the NHA, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, and the SA-GCPs, all ECs are required to register with the NHREC in order to undertake the ethical review of a clinical study. Registration information is available on the NHREC webpage (ZAF-12), and a list of ECs currently registered with NHREC is available at ZAF-13. The application to register an EC is at ZAF-53. ZAF-54 states that the EC registration is recorded and publicly listed by the NHREC.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the criteria for the NHREC registration assessment and the eligibility audit for ECs are based on the G-EthicsHR-ZAF and other internationally recognized guidelines. Members of the NHREC undertake the assessment and auditing to ensure that ECs comply with capacity and operational requirements. After the first pre-registration audit, guidance and recommendations for improvement are provided with specific timelines for improvements. Before the registration is completed and a registration number is issued, NHREC conducts a follow-up audit to ensure that required revisions have been completed. Voluntary deregistration can occur when an EC is no longer active and closes. A critical part of the ongoing quality assurance review process is the EC annual report form (ZAF-54).

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that the NHREC conducts a comprehensive quality assurance assessment and administrative audit of ECs on a five (5)-year cycle to check compliance with the various administrative and record-keeping standards. When an EC persistently fails to comply with expected standards, the NHREC must enforce the standards, e.g., to suspend operations until compliance is achieved or, in extreme cases, to revoke registration of the committee. If an EC is suspended, the NHREC informs the EC of the suspended registration status and outlines the steps to be taken to rectify matters so that a registered status may be reinstated. Capacity evaluation and enhancement for ECs is also an important function of the NHREC. During the period of suspension, the EC concerned may not review new protocols for health research and may not permit another registered EC to review on their behalf. Instead, they should refer applicants to another registered EC. An assessment of the implications for harm to participants will determine whether ongoing monitoring of approved studies is acceptable to the NHREC. Failure by the EC to respond to the required measures to reverse the status of suspended registration can lead to registration being revoked. In this case, a new application for registration is required.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Overview

As delineated in the SA-GCPs, the sponsor and the investigator must obtain approval from the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) and a registered ethics committee (EC) to begin a clinical trial in South Africa. Per ZAF-23, the review and approval of clinical trial applications by SAHPRA and an accredited EC may be conducted in parallel. As indicated in ZAF-20, the same process applies to the review and approval of an amendment to the protocol. However, note that the G-EthicsHR-ZAF recommends that scientific review be completed prior to ethics review and, in cases where scientific review capacity is not available, the EC approval should be delayed until SAHPRA scientific approval has been provided.

Regulatory Submission

Per ZAF-36, researchers must submit a completed application (ZAF-23) and the prescribed fee to SAHPRA on predetermined dates (ZAF-11) and obtain proof of delivery. The proof of delivery, proof of payments, and cover page must be sent to SAHPRA via email. The G-CTA-Electronic delineates the electronic submission and communication process in SAHPRA’s Clinical Trial Unit (CTU). For new clinical trial applications (excluding bioequivalence studies), upon submission at SAHPRA Reception, applicants are requested to alert the CTU via e-mail at ctcresponses@sahpra.org.za and include a copy of the proof of delivery, proof of payment, and proof of insurance. In the subject of the e-mail, the applicant should provide the application type, protocol number, SAHPRA predetermined cycle (see ZAF-11), and email number in case of multiple emails (e.g., “email 1 of 5”). Note that the submission email must include organized zipped folders for various sections of the clinical trial application. Individual site documents for each staff member must be uploaded into one (1) document and labelled with the staff name and arranged in folders according to the site which they belong to.

Per G-CTA-Electronic, to respond to SAHPRA’s screening checklist or to CTU’s expert committee review, the applicant must submit all responses by e-mail to ctcresponses@sahpra.org.za and include labelled attachments to the required documents. In the subject of the email, the applicant should provide the type of application, protocol number, and SAHPRA database tracking number. Responses to the CTU’s expert committee recommendations can be in MSWord or PDF formats. All other accompanying documents should be in PDF format v1.4, 1.5, 1.6, or 1.7 and legible with the Acrobat Reader search plugin or any other freeware viewer. PDF files should be saved as “Optimized” to reduce the size and allow faster opening when viewed online. The use of additional software to navigate and work with the files is not acceptable. If PDF files are not produced from an electronic source document but from scanned paper, readability and file size should be balanced; the following is recommended: resolution 300 dpi (photographs up to 600 dpi), avoid grayscale or color where possible, use only lossless compression techniques. The file must be searchable (OCR scanned). In addition, the maximum size of documents allowed per e-mail is 5 MB. As per arrangement with CTU, in case of a big file of documents and documents that need to be couriered, the waybill should indicate the type of application, protocol number, and SAHPRA database tracking number.

As delineated in the G-CTA-Electronic, for bioequivalence studies, the application and accompanying documents should be emailed to ctcbeprotocols@sahpra.org.za. The clinical trial application form should be in MS Word format and all other accompanying documents in PDF, as described above. As per arrangement with CTU, in case of a big file of documents and documents need to be couriered, the waybill should indicate the type of application, protocol number, and SAHPRA database tracking number. The email subject should include the application type, protocol number, and SAHPRA database tracking number. See the G-CTA-Electronic for specific examples of labeling the emails.

Per the G-CTAPHEmerg, during a public health emergency, applicants should use the modified clinical trial application form in G-CTAPHEmerg. This form recognizes the constraints on the availability of information posed by the emergency. SAHPRA may accept clinical trial applications with reduced information together with a commitment to update and complete the required information as soon as possible. However, all documents submitted must be organized with zipped folders according to the checklist in G-CTAPHEmerg and correctly labelled to ensure easy validation by SAHPRA (See the Submission Content and Emergencies sections for more details).

The G-CTA-Electronic provides instructions on submitting protocol amendments during the conduct of clinical trials, for additional investigators and sites during the conduct of clinical trials, bioequivalence studies, notifications and notification studies, and individual serious adverse events. The applicant must submit to SAHPRA the application for amendment to an approved trial (ZAF-20), as well as notify and get EC approval. (Also see Site/Investigator Selection and Safety Reporting sections for information about these submittal processes.)

The G-CTA-Electronic and ZAF-23 state that the clinical trial application must be sent to SAHPRA in a submission email (per directions above). However, ZAF-1 provides the following address for delivery of clinical trial applications to SAHPRA Reception:

South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
SAHPRA Reception – 2nd floor
Loftus Park, Building A
402 Kirkness St, Arcadia
Pretoria, 0007
South Africa

Per ZAF-1, upon receipt of the clinical trial application at SAHPRA Reception, an acknowledgement of receipt in the form of a stamp and signature will be issued. The waybill from a courier company does not suffice as proof of delivery. SAHPRA’s CTU requires a document, referred to as the ‘stamp page,’ which includes the SAHPRA trial reference number, protocol number, and study title. This document will then be date-stamped and signed by SAHPRA’s Administrative Department and returned as proof.

As per the GRMRSA, all applications and supporting data submitted to the SAHPRA should be presented in English. Original documents that are not in English must be accompanied by an English translation.

Ethics Review Submission

Each EC has its own required submission procedures, which can differ significantly regarding the number of copies to be supplied and application format requirements. Refer to each EC’s website for specific submission procedures.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

As per ZAF-23, the following documentation must be submitted to the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA):

The clinical trial application form (ZAF-23)
Two (2) cover letters (one (1) signed in PDF and one (1) in MS-Word format)
Two (2) completed copies of the clinical trial application (one (1) signed in PDF and one (1) in MS-Word format) (ZAF-23 and ZAF-20 (for amendments))
Checklist
Protocol
Patient information leaflets (PILs) and informed consent forms (ICFs); include standardized SAHPRA contact details (Annex 1 of ZAF-23)
Copy(ies) of recruitment advertisement(s) (if applicable) and questionnaires
Investigator’s Brochure (IB)/SAHPRA and other regulatory authorities’ approved professional information (Package insert(s))
Summary of previous trials with the investigational product(s) (IP(s)), if applicable
Certificate of analysis of the product
Signed investigator(s) Curriculum Vitae(s) (CV) in SAHPRA format (Annex 2 of ZAF-23)
Signed declaration(s) by all investigator(s) (Annex 3 of ZAF-23)
Signed joint financial declaration by sponsor and principal investigator (PI) or national PI (Annex 4 of ZAF-23)
Signed declaration by applicant and national PI
Signed declaration by national PI (See page 4 and Annex 3 (ZAF-23)
Signed declaration by sub-investigators (Annex 5 of ZAF-23)
CV(s) and signed declaration by regional monitor(s) (Annexes 2 and 6 of ZAF-23)
Proof of application to register the trial on the South African National Clinical Trials Register (SANCTR) (ZAF-48)
Active insurance certificate for clinical trial
Proof of sponsor indemnity for investigators and trial site(s) (Annex 7 of ZAF-23)
Active Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Certificates
Workload forms for investigators (Annex 8 of ZAF-23)
Proof of registration with professional statutory bodies
Proof of professional indemnity (malpractice insurance) of trialist(s)
Ethics committee (EC) approval letter or copy of letter submitted to EC
Study budget
Electronic copies of key peer reviewed publications following International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) recommendations to support the application (if applicable)
Proof of payment (bank validated)
Certificate of good manufacturing practice (GMP) for manufacture of the IP(s) (including placebo and comparator)
Evidence of accreditation/certifications of the designated laboratories
Data Safety Monitoring Board charter and composition (where applicable)
See ZAF-36 for additional information on submissions. For phase IV trials of approved products, the applicant must notify SAHPRA following the instructions provided in ZAF-17.

ZAF-20 delineates the contents and requirements for submitting an application for protocol amendment to an approved clinical trial.

Per the G-CTAPHEmerg, SAHPRA states that during a public health emergency, new and experimental treatments may become necessary and clinical trials are essential to provide the evidence to develop appropriate policies for patient treatments. Under these circumstances, there may be limited information available. However, applications need to contain a certain minimum of information to enable a meaningful evaluation and regulatory decisions. To address this, SAHPRA provides an information grading system in the G-CTAPHEmerg wherein required information is labelled. Applicants must attempt to provide the information listed below and justify when this is not available. The required information is graded as follows:

Essential – Application will not be considered without this
Important – Necessary information that must be provided later and must be justified if not available
Not essential – May be omitted from this preliminary application
All incomplete information must be explained, justified, and provided to SAHPRA as a complete application (ZAF-23), when available. This means that repeat evaluations of an application may be necessary.

Ethics Committee Requirements

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, each EC has its own application form and clearance requirements that can differ, but ECs must ensure that the submission content includes the following:

A description of the essential ethical elements: an explanation of the proposed research in plain language, information about potential participants (age range, vulnerabilities, etc.), and ethical implications of the research
Indication of whether it is a sub-study or parent study; each sub-study must be reviewed
Adequate consideration of participants’ welfare, rights, beliefs, perceptions, customs, and cultural heritage
All documents and other material to be used to inform potential participants, such as information sheets, consent forms, questionnaires, advertisements, videos, dramatizations, and letters
A description of the readability level to ensure that plain language is adapted to the anticipated literacy levels in the participant documentation
Evidence of community engagement and plans for ongoing consultation, as appropriate
Plans to implement benefit sharing, as appropriate to the context
Monitoring schedules, the responsible persons, and their contact numbers
Disclosure of any researcher conflicts of interest, financial interests, or information that may result in perceptions of conflict of interest
A data management plan (See the Personal Data Protection section for more details)
See ZAF-22, ZAF-45, and ZAF-49 for example EC applications, which share some or all of following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Cover letter
Completed EC-specific application form
Protocol
Protocol synopsis
PIL(s) and ICF(s) and process for obtaining informed consent
Separate assent form required for minors under the age of 18 (See Children/Minors section for additional information)
IB and package insert(s) (if applicable)
SAHPRA approval letter or letter of application and notification
Approval letter from institution’s scientific committee (if applicable)
Copy of completed clinical trial application signed by all participating investigators
All questionnaires and diaries to be used in the study
Advertisement(s) (if applicable)
Trial site information (address, telephone numbers, PI names, etc.)
Trial payment schedule and budget schedule per site/draft financial contract and additional funding details
Proof of submission fees payment
Current investigator(s) CVs
GCP training certificates for PIs and subinvestigators
Information on registration with SANCTR (ZAF-48)
Declaration of trialists (PI and sub-investigators) in SAHPRA format
Insurance certificate
Further, per the MTA-Human, all the providers and recipients of human biological material for use in research or clinical trials under the auspices of ECs must use the “Material Transfer Agreement of Human Biological Materials” in MTA-Human. The agreement must be signed by the research institution’s authorized representative and the EC. (For additional details, see Specimens topic.)

Clinical Protocol

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, it is strongly recommended that a report on the scientific review should accompany the protocol in the EC application. If a separate scientific review capacity is not available, the EC must ensure that the science is satisfactorily explained in the protocol. As delineated in the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the SA-GCPs, and ZAF-23 the clinical protocol should contain the following information (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

General information
Background information
Study rationale and motivation
Trial objectives, purpose, and endpoints (with justifications)
Scientific design and methodology
IP information
Participant eligibility, selection, and withdrawal; inclusion and exclusion criteria
Selection of study population and sampling
Community and stakeholder engagement
Recruitment and enrollment
Risk/benefit analysis
Reimbursements and inducements for participants
Informed consent
Participant treatment
Participants’ interests in privacy and confidentiality
Efficacy assessment
Safety assessment
Statistics
Direct access to source data/documents
Research procedures and quality control/quality assurance
Data and safety monitoring plan
Data handling/recordkeeping
Statistical measures
Financing/insurance
How data records (written, audio or visual) are to be secured, the length of time for which they will be retained, and who will be responsible for storage and/or final disposal
An explanation on why particular identifying information is required for the study that purports to collect data anonymously
Measures in place to assess whether notifiable activities might occur amongst participants, e.g., abuse of minors or notifiable diseases
Per the SA-GCPs, the protocol must also provide details on ethical and administrative issues, including how the following matters are addressed:

Compliance of multi-center/national trials with all South African regulatory requirements
The trial design must be customized appropriately for the local setting to ensure that local realities are considered and appropriately integrated into the design
For multi-national trials, whether a reasonable proportion of significant project team members, including scientists and health care professionals, are South African researchers, including those from previously disadvantaged backgrounds
If South Africa is selected as a clinical trial site but the country of origin or other high-income countries are not, an explanation and reason for this with a clear ethical justification
For detailed information on protocol elements, please refer to ZAF-23 and the SA-GCPs.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Overview

Based on ZAF-23 and the SA-GCPs, the review and approval of clinical trial applications by the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) and an accredited ethics committee (EC) may be conducted in parallel. The applicant must notify each regulatory body of the other’s approval once it has been received. However, note that the G-EthicsHR-ZAF recommends that scientific review be completed prior to ethics review and, in cases where scientific review capacity is not available, the EC approval should be delayed until SAHPRA scientific approval has been provided. Also, where site permissions are required, e.g., from Provincial Health Research Committees (PHRCs) or superintendents, to conduct research in health care facilities, ECs must delay granting full approval until these permissions are received to prevent research from beginning before the facility knows it will happen.

Regulatory Authority Approval

In general, per ZAF-36, SAHPRA’s Clinical Trial Unit (CTU) aims to process new applications and issue a screening checklist within three (3) weeks of receipt. After that, the expert Clinical Trials Committee (CTC) recommendations will be sent within 10 weeks of the submission due date. There are cases where this turnaround time might be prolonged, such as an unfamiliar investigational product which may be referred to external reviewers or other SAHPRA committees for input.

Per ZAF-1, during the preliminary screening, the CTU screens the application and sends an official letter to the applicant with the outcome and follow-up questions on a screening checklist. The applicant receives the screening checklist within 15 working days after application submission. The applicant must respond within seven (7) working days after receipt of the screening review.

Next, the CTC reviews the proposed clinical trials. ZAF-11 provides the dates of the 2026 CTC meetings and the SAHPRA submission due dates. It is advisable to submit clinical trial applications before these due dates. Once the reviewer approves the application, the CTC presents the committee’s/reviewer’s recommendations to the SAHPRA. ZAF-1 states that applicants receive a response within 10 working days from the CTC meeting, and they must send an answer within seven (7) working days after receipt of comments. If an applicant would like to request a meeting with the CTC, the request should be submitted through the SAHPRA Chief Executive Office pursuant to the procedures in the G-ConsultMtg.

Ethics Committee Approval

Review timelines vary per each EC’s procedures. The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that ECs must define the review timelines in their standard operating procedures.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the GRMRSA, the SA-GCPs, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, and the NHAParticipants, a clinical trial can only commence in South Africa once an applicant receives approval from the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) and from a registered ethics committee (EC). There is no waiting period required following the applicant’s receipt of these approvals. Note that the G-EthicsHR-ZAF recommends that scientific review be completed prior to ethics review and, in cases where scientific review capacity is not available, the EC approval should be delayed until SAHPRA scientific approval has been provided. Also, where site permissions are required, e.g., from Provincial Health Research Committees (PHRCs) or superintendents, to conduct research in health care facilities, ECs must delay granting full approval until these permissions are received to prevent research from beginning before the facility knows it will happen.

The trial must be conducted in compliance with the SA-GCPs, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, and the GRMRSA. Also, per the SA-GCPs, all clinical trials must be conducted in a laboratory complying with Good Laboratory Practices (GLP). See ZAF-2 for the World Health Organization (WHO)’s handbook on GLPs.

Per the SA-GPPs, pharmacists must be involved in clinical trials, including for example, assisting in the development of protocols, overseeing medicine supplies, monitoring administration protocols, and maintaining registries. According to the SA-GCPs, the sponsor must also define and allocate all study related duties and responsibilities to the investigator prior to initiating the study.

Clinical Trial Agreement

According to the SA-GCPs, all parties involved in the conduct of a trial should be familiar with guidance in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZAF-27) and other international guidelines. All clinical trials should be conducted in accordance with all ethical principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki (ZAF-44). Before the trial begins, a sponsor must prepare a written agreement. The agreement must be signed by the sponsor and the PI, and any other parties involved (e.g., institutions and contract research organizations) with the trial to confirm the contract terms. Both the sponsor and the PI must commit to providing safety information between each other. The sponsor should also obtain the investigator's agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with the SA-GCPs, the SAHPRA requirements, ZAF-27, and the EC approved protocol
Comply with data recording/reporting procedures
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain the trial-related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator(s) and institution(s) that these documents are no longer needed
In addition, per the SA-GCPs, the financial aspects of the trial should be documented in the agreement. A declaration must be signed by the sponsor and PI stating that sufficient funds are available to complete the study. The sponsor is also responsible for securing agreements to ensure direct access to all trial-related sites, source data/documents, and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities.

Clinical Trial Registration

According to the SA-GCPs, NHAParticipants, and ZAF-32, the PI or the sponsor must enter the trial information in the South African National Clinical Trials Register (SANCTR) (ZAF-48). The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that solely the sponsor must register all South Africa-based trials on SANCTR, and if the trial has no commercial sponsor, the PI must register the trial. According to the SA-GCPs, the National Department of Health (NDOH) then issues a unique SANCTR National Register Number. ZAF-32 has instructions for registering either online or via email.

ZAF-48 states that SANCTR fulfills the requirements of the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) publication mandates and has a formal partnership with the Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (ZAF-50), which is recognized by the WHO.

Governance

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF explains that research, especially that using state or provincial facilities and resources, should link to health care system priorities, and findings should be integrated into policy planning and management of health programs. PHRCs were established to liaise with researchers to ensure that the greatest health needs of each province are being addressed. As such, they perform a gate-keeping role by managing access to health facilities. While they accept ethics approval granted by a registered EC, they need to consider applications to use their facilities to manage potential interference with or interruption of services. It is thus important that PIs respect this role of the PHRCs. Some provinces have also registered provincial ECs, and these committees are important in areas of the country where other ECs are not active.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

In accordance with the SA-GCPs and the G-SafetyRpt, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of South Africa’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event/Experience (AE) – Any untoward medical occurrence that may present during treatment with a medicine, but which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment
Adverse Drug Reaction or Adverse Reaction (ADR) – A noxious and unintended response to a medicine in humans or animals, including lack of efficacy, and which occurs at any dosage and can also result from overdose, misuse, or abuse of a medicine
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life-threatening, requires patient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity, or is a congenital anomaly or birth defect
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction – One in which the nature, specificity, severity, and outcome is inconsistent with the applicable product information (i.e., with the approved package inserts for registered medicines, the investigator’s brochure, or other product information for unregistered medicines being used)
The G-EthicsHR-ZAF defines SAE as an unforeseen harmful event related to the study (e.g., injury/death due to an experimental intervention), thereby negatively affecting the research participants and requiring an intervention.

Per the G-EmergencyProc, all clinical trial sites must have an emergency standard operating procedure that should be available for inspection by the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA). In addition, each clinical trial site should have adequately trained investigators to manage medical emergencies. Further, there must be an emergency 24-hour contact number for trial participants who experience an unexpected AE.

Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

As specified in the SA-GCPs, the principal investigator (PI) must inform the sponsor immediately, or within the time specified in the protocol, of any serious and/or unexpected AEs occurring during the study. The initial reporting form and any relevant follow-up information should be sent to the sponsor. The G-SafetyRpt directs the investigator to report AEs to the sponsor in a manner defined in the protocol. Per the SA-GCPs, AEs and/or laboratory abnormalities identified in the protocol as critical to safety evaluations must be reported to the sponsor in accordance with the reporting requirement and within the time periods specified in the protocol. In the case of participant deaths, the PI must supply the sponsor, the ethics committee (EC), and SAHPRA with any additional information, as requested. The initial and follow-up reports must identify the affected participants by the participant identification code.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, researchers are expected to provide appropriate information to the EC to facilitate monitoring, including alerts. If an EC conducts a site visit, the evaluation should include inspecting documentation of AEs and SAEs. In addition, ECs should request regular, at least annual, reports from PIs on matters including a list of all AEs in the past 12 months.

Sponsor Responsibilities

As delineated in the GRMRSA, the sponsor is required to report all expected or unexpected SAEs/SADRs on an expedited basis to all concerned parties, including the investigator(s) and institution(s), the SAHPRA, and the ECs. Pursuant to the G-SafetyRpt, the sponsor is required to submit the following safety reports to SAHPRA:

Reports of SUSARs occurring in the clinical trial using the SAHPRA SAE form (ZAF-19), CIOMS form (ZAF-15), or Annex B of G-SafetyRpt
Reports of all SUSARs and trends occurring with the investigational product (IP) in South Africa
Six-month progress report
Annual Development Safety Update Reports (DSURs) that include information gathered from all clinical experience with the IP, whether in South Africa or elsewhere
Final Progress Report
Final Study Report
The SA-GCPs states that the sponsor is responsible for performing an ongoing safety evaluation of the IP and must promptly provide written notification to the investigator and SAHPRA of findings that may adversely affect the safety of participants or the conduct of the trial, and/or change the EC's approval to continue the trial. The commitment to provide safety information must be included in the clinical trial agreement signed between the sponsor and the investigator.

The G-SafetyRpt delineates the following reporting timeframes:

The sponsor should initially report all fatal or life-threatening SAEs in local reports within seven (7) calendar days after first knowledge, using CIOMS format (ZAF-15)/SAHPRA SAE form (ZAF-19). The follow-up report should be submitted within an additional eight (8) calendar days.
All fatal or life-threatening SAEs in foreign reports should initially be reported within 30 calendar days after first knowledge by the sponsor. The follow-up report should be submitted within an additional six (6) months as part of the progress report. If the SAEs result in premature study closure, the reporting times are shorter—seven (7) days for the initial report and within an additional eight (8) days for the follow-up report. These reports should be in a line listing format. Note that these reporting requirements also cover foreign reports of “special concern,” which is a significant safety issue defined for each clinical trial that requires urgent attention from the regulatory authority. An adverse reaction of special concern from a foreign jurisdiction should be based on the decision of its regulatory authority. A safety issue leading to international regulatory action is considered to be significant at all times and hence reportable.
Local reports of other serious events (unexpected, not fatal or life threatening) within 15 calendar days of the event and every six (6) months in the CIOMS format (ZAF-15)/SAHPRA SAE form (ZAF-19)
A line listing of all local reports—serious (unexpected and expected) AEs—and any other issues of special concern outside South Africa should be submitted every six (6) months (using the progress report form in ZAF-18).
An initial detailed report of new information impacting the risk-benefit profile of the IP or conduct of trial should be submitted within three (3) calendar days; a follow-up report should be submitted within an additional six (6) months.
An initial detailed report of other major safety concerns (e.g., changes in nature, severity, or frequency of risk factors) should be submitted within 15 days of knowledge of the concern; a follow-up report should be submitted within an additional six (6) months.
DSURs should be submitted within one (1) year from approval of the study and annually thereafter.
In addition, SAHPRA reserves the right to impose additional reporting timelines on an individual protocol basis, and it may require expedited reporting of AEs of special interest, whether serious or not.

See the G-SafetyRpt for details on the contents of the reports and other safety report requirements.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

Per the G-SafetyRpt and ZAF-19, the SAHPRA’s Safety Reporting During Clinical Trials Form (ZAF-19) should be used to complete SAE/ADR reports—for both initial and follow-up safety reports. The G-SafetyRpt indicates that adverse drug reactions occurring during post-marketing studies (Phase 4 and observational studies) should be reported to the Vigilance Unit of SAHPRA, and adverse drug reactions occurring during the use of concomitant and/or comparator medicine in a clinical trial should be reported to the Clinical Trial Unit of SAHPRA. Reportable safety information must be sent to:

ctcsaes@sahpra.org.za for clinical trials (per ZAF-47, ctcsaes@sahpra.org.za should be used for individual patient SAEs and related queries)
adr@sahpra.org.za or e2b@sahpra.org.za for post-marketing studies
section21@sahpra.org.za for reporting of SAEs for medicines used under Section 21
As per ZAF-47, the following is the contact information for pharmacovigilance-related submissions:

ADR reports in an e2b in an xml format: e2b@sahpra.org.za
All other ADR reports: adr@sahpra.org.za
Pharmacovigilance related queries: pvqueries@sahpra.org.za
Documentation relating to identified safety concerns, responses to recommendations, and Risk Management Plans (RMPs): pvsubmissions@sahpra.org.za
G-CTA-Electronic details the requirements for electronic submission of individual SAEs. All SAEs should be submitted to ctcsaes@sahpra.org.za with a cover letter detailing:

The title of the study
The SAHPRA reference number
Protocol number
Name of site
Patient study ID
Cause of SAE
Causality and SAE reporting form
Other applicable information
The email subject line should include the following information: SAE, protocol number, and SAHPRA database tracking number.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

In accordance with the GRMRSA, the person authorized by the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) to conduct a clinical trial (i.e., the sponsor) must submit progress reports to the SAHPRA every six (6) months from the application approval date. The SA-GCPs requires the investigator to submit written progress reports to the ethics committee (EC) annually and to the SAHPRA every six (6) months. ECs and the SAHPRA may request reports more frequently. The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that ECs should request regular, at least annual, reports from principal investigators (PIs) on matters including: progress; current enrolment status; whether participant follow-up is still active or completed; record maintenance and security; evidence of compliance with the approved protocol and any conditions of approval; negative reports from monitors or good clinical practice (GCP) inspectors; all adverse events in the past 12 months; and all amendments made in the past 12 months.

Per the GRMRSA, the SA-GCPs, and G-SafetyRpt, the six-month report (ZAF-18) must include the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

SAHPRA database tracking number
Study title
Protocol number
Details of the sponsor
Progress to date or the outcome in case of completed research
Whether participant follow up is still active or has been completed
List of all active trial sites, addresses, and PIs
Trial information, including date of approval of study, treatment hold (if applicable), and expected date of completion
Number of participants per site and current enrollment status
Sponsor comment on progress to date
Summary of Data Safety Monitoring Board or Safety Committee recommendations and relevant safety data
Serious adverse events and suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions for all participants per site in South Africa, including identification of previous safety reports submitted to the SAHPRA concerning a similar suspected adverse reaction and an analysis of their connection
Any safety issues of special concern outside of South Africa
Line listing of all critical and major protocol violations/noncompliance and resolutions/actions taken at a site or conditions of approval
PI comment on other major safety concerns
Signature of the PI
Signature of the sponsor
Note that the SA-GCPs directs the investigator to promptly provide written reports to the sponsor/applicant, the EC, and where applicable, the institution on changes that significantly affect trial conduct and/or increase the risk of participant harm.

Final Report

The sponsor is required to submit a final progress report to the SAHPRA 30 days following the trial’s completion as stated in the GRMRSA and the G-SafetyRpt. Further, per G-SafetyRpt, a final study report should be submitted within 180 days of clinical trial completion or termination.

In addition, per the SA-GCPs, upon the trial’s end, the investigator must inform the institution (if applicable), the EC, and the SAHPRA and provide them with a summary of the trial outcome and other required reports.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states PIs or research leaders must disseminate research results or findings, whether positive or negative, in a timely, accessible, responsible, and competent manner. This includes reporting back to participant communities where appropriate.

The SA-GCPs specifies that the sponsor must ensure that trial results and outcomes are reported to the investigators, the SAHPRA, and the National Department of Health (NDOH) via the South African National Clinical Trials Register (SANCTR) (ZAF-48) within one (1) year of the study’s completion. The sponsor and the PI are responsible for appropriate dissemination of the trial findings.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
As defined in the SA-GCPs, a sponsor is the person or organization responsible for the initiation, management, or financing of a clinical trial. A sponsor can be a pharmaceutical company, the principal investigator (PI), a funding body, or an individual or organization designated by the funding body or academic institution. An applicant can be an individual, company, institution, or organization that acts on behalf of the sponsor to initiate and manage the trial as its local representative. In the case of an international sponsor, a local applicant designated by the sponsor is responsible for initiation and management of the trial in the local context.

Per the SA-GCPs, a sponsor may transfer any or all trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO). However, the sponsor is always ultimately responsible for the study data quality and integrity. Further, per the G-Monitor, the sponsor is solely responsible for adequate oversight of clinical trial conduct, including the justification for and selection of monitoring methods. Any trial-related responsibilities transferred to and assumed by a CRO should be specified in writing. The sponsor retains those responsibilities not specifically transferred to and assumed by a CRO.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Overview

As set forth in the SA-GCPs, the sponsor is responsible for using qualified individuals (e.g., biostatisticians, clinical pharmacologists, and physicians), as appropriate, throughout all stages of the trial process. Sponsors should select investigator(s) who are qualified by training and experience and have adequate resources to conduct the proposed clinical trial.

Per the SA-GCPs, all parties involved in the conduct of a trial should be familiar with the guidance in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZAF-27) and other international guidelines.

Capacity Building & Training

As described in the G-Monitor, the sponsor should consider previous experience with the investigator or site, workload of the investigator, and resource availability at the study site during investigator and site selection. Per the G-Capacity, clinical trial applications should include evidence and activity plans to build capacity at each study site as well as enhancing research activities and skills of professionals from historically disadvantaged groups. Mandatory training in Good Clinical Practice (GCP) forms a part of capacity building. To support transformation and capacity building, the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) states that the sponsor must have a policy on “Capacity Building and Transformation in Clinical Research in SA” in place, and preferentially select sites that are compliant. See G-Capacity, for detailed information on actions that will comply with this requirement.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that researchers must be suitably qualified and technically competent (trained and supervised, in the case of student researchers) to carry out the proposed research. The principal investigator (PI) has primary responsibility to ensure the safety and wellbeing of participants, the scientific integrity of the protocol, research data management, and responsible implementation of that protocol. Competence is demonstrated mainly by academic qualifications, credentials, and scientific and technical competence, as evidenced in previous publications or testimonials. Competence includes research competence, which is assessed in terms of education, knowledge, certification, and experience. In addition, researchers must produce evidence of appropriate research ethics training within the previous three (3) years.

The SA-GCPs prescribes mandatory GCP training with evidence of current (i.e., within three (3) years) GCP training and general research ethics training. To meet the required GCP training, the GCP-Trning indicates that virtual methods are acceptable (Zoom, Teams, etc.) for both basic and refresher training. Virtual training must be done properly, which includes monitoring interactive and active engagement of participants, and using a full-time facilitator (qualified to conduct training) available for the entire duration including questions and answers. To ensure inclusivity and fairness, consideration should be given to those who are unable to attend virtual training, especially in remote areas where internet accessibility remains a challenge. A hybrid model could be considered in this case. The duration of basic GCP training should be in alignment with the prescribed outcomes or unit standards (approximately two (2) days). The training content should be accredited by the Health Professions Council of South Africa (HPCSA).

Management of Investigators

According to the SA-GCPs, the sponsor must also define and allocate all study related duties and responsibilities to the investigator prior to initiating the study.

In addition, per ZAF-21, to add or change investigators and/or additional sites to an approved clinical trial, the sponsor must submit a signed application to SAHPRA. See ZAF-21 for details.

Per the G-CTInvestigators, SAHPRA will recognize and approve categories of investigators for trial leadership. The PI must be a South Africa-based scientist, who has sole or joint responsibility for the design, conduct, and delegation of trial responsibilities, analysis, and reporting. The PI is accountable to the sponsor and regulatory authorities. The PI can designate and supervise sub-principal investigator(s) (Sub-PI) of which at least one (1) must be a clinician and registered with the appropriate statutory entity to provide clinical oversight within their scope of practice. Further, the SAHPRA recognizes a category of co-principal investigator (co-PI), which allows for a team consisting of two (2) co-PIs to lead a study at a site. At least one (1) of the co-PIs must be a clinician registered with the appropriate statutory body and qualified to provide clinical oversight within their scope of practice. For multi-center studies, there must be a national PI appointed, who may or may not be a site PI. The national PI must have appropriate experience and expertise in that field and must be responsible for the application to the SAHPRA to conduct the study. The national PI must meet all other requirements to be a PI and sign a declaration accepting the responsibility as national PI and sign off on the clinical trial application. For more information on PI requirements, roles, and responsibilities, see the G-CTInvestigators.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

As required in the SA-GCPs, if South Africa is selected as a clinical trial site but the country of origin or other high-income countries are not, the sponsor must explain the reason(s) why and provide a clear ethical justification. Further, multi-national trials should ensure that a reasonable proportion of project team members are South African researchers, including scientists and health care professionals and those from previously disadvantaged backgrounds.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, all international collaborative health research conducted in South Africa must undergo ethics review and approval by a South African registered EC and comply with the SA-GCPs. In addition, if international collaborators are affiliated with a foreign research institution or university, they must provide evidence of ethics review and approval from their home institution. International researchers are expected to demonstrate sensitivity to and understanding of the local socio-economic and political conditions of the research context, as these may indicate vulnerabilities of potential participants. It is advisable to create appropriate memoranda of understanding (MOUs) and agreements to establish the expectations, roles, and contributions of the various parties, as well as the limitations of the collaborative relationship. An agreement should exist between the host research institution and the collaborating institution(s) regarding all aspects of the research, including management of the research itself; research data management that includes the fate of the data and samples after completion of the study; financial arrangements; approach to research output publications; infrastructure development; allocation of intellectual property rights; and dispute resolution mechanisms. Selection of study participants is expected to be based on distributive justice and fairness. Risk/benefit assessments must be properly conducted to ensure that foreseeable risks of harm are mitigated and that anticipated benefits of participation are distributed fairly.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

Per the SA-GCPs, the sponsor may establish an independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including safety data and critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial. The DSMB must have written standard operating procedures and must maintain written records of all its meetings.

Multicenter Studies

Per the SA-GCPs, if the trial is a multicenter and/or multi-country trial, any differences in trial designs between the South African and other sites must be clearly documented and explained in the trial protocol and/or related documents. In addition, international research groups must comply with South African regulatory requirements, and researchers must adapt the trial design and informed consent procedures to take into account local conditions and characteristics.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that for international multi-site research, at least one (1) PI or co-PI must be physically in South Africa.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Insurance

As set forth in the G-Insurance and the SA-GCPs, all clinical trial sponsors and investigators must obtain adequate insurance and indemnity to cover any liability claims during the conduct of a clinical trial, in accordance with the responsibilities described in the SA-GCPs. As delineated in the SA-GCPs and G-Insurance, a sponsor must follow the principles set forth in the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry’s (ABPI) guidelines (ZAF-26 and ZAF-25) to comply with South Africa’s clinical trial insurance requirements. Per the SA-GCPs, research participants should not bear any financial cost to rectify harms that occur as a result of trial participation. The insurer pays the medical costs of necessary treatment to restore the previous position of the participant, if possible, when bodily or other injury is attributable to trial participation. Only bodily injuries of an enduring and disabling character (including exacerbation of an existing condition) and/or death are covered by the insurance. Temporary pain or discomfort or less serious or curable complaints are generally not regarded as trial-related, bodily injury. In the case of an in-utero injury due to the mother’s participation, payment for medical expenses proceeds as though the unborn child is a research participant. For additional details on limitations on liability, dispute resolution, weighting of risk factors, and insurance settlements, see the SA-GCPs. In addition, see the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, which reaffirms these requirements and provides legal analysis of insurance and legal claims.

Per the G-Insurance, the application to conduct a clinical trial must include evidence of comprehensive no fault insurance for serious injury and harm and/or death. In addition, the sponsor must provide indemnification for all investigators and trial sites involved in their clinical studies on compliance with the protocol requirements. In cases where the investigators/site staff were negligent and/or did not comply with the protocol requirements, personal malpractice insurance would apply.

As delineated in the G-Insurance and ZAF-23, an insurance certificate and indemnity must be included in the clinical trial application submitted to the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA). Per the G-Insurance, the sponsor must include details of the insurance, including the following:

Name and local address of the insurance company, including contact name and telephone number
Title and protocol number of the clinical trial
Date of commencement and termination of coverage
Liability limit – per occurrence and total per occurrence and total for the study. Note that the limit should be adequate enough to cover extended stay in an intensive care unit or hospital
Date of issuance of the insurance policy and expiry thereof
Original or electronic signature of the insurer
Special conditions if any. It is unacceptable to have special conditions which may invalidate or abate the clinical trial cover
Any additional coverage
Declaration of compliance with the SA-GCPs and ABPI guidelines on the certificate and in the patient information leaflet
Where the insurance is not provided by a local company, a local insurance vendor must be identified with full details
Insurance policy number
The amount insured
Compensation

Injury or Death

As set forth in the G-Insurance, all clinical trial sponsors and investigators must have adequate insurance to cover any liability claims during the conduct of a clinical trial, in accordance with the responsibilities as described in the SA-GCPs. As delineated in the SA-GCPs and G-Insurance, a sponsor must follow the principles set forth in the ABPI guidelines (ZAF-26 and ZAF-25) to comply with South Africa’s participant compensation and treatment requirements for trial-related injuries. The guidelines state that the sponsor should furnish written assurance to the investigator that the sponsor will agree to pay compensation to participants and/or their legal heirs in the event of trial-related injuries or death. The investigator, in turn, communicates this information to the relevant ethics committee (EC).

The SA-GCPs, the G-Insurance, and ZAF-26 provide several compensation principles to guide sponsors in fulfilling their obligations (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Compensation should be paid when it can be demonstrated that a causal relationship exists between a participant’s injury and their participation in a trial
Compensation should be paid when the injury results in permanent injury or disability to the participant
When there is an adverse reaction to a medicinal product under trial, and injury is caused by a procedure adopted to deal with that adverse reaction
The sponsor/applicant is under strict liability with respect to injuries caused by the investigational product (IP), and research participants should not bear any financial cost to rectify harms that occur as a result of trial participation
The insurer should pay the medical costs of necessary treatment to restore the previous position of the participant, if possible
In the case of an in-utero injury due to the mother’s participation, payment for medical expenses proceeds as though the unborn child is a research participant
In principle, only bodily injuries of an enduring and disabling character (including exacerbation of an existing condition) and/or death are covered by the insurance; temporary pain or discomfort or less serious or curable complaints are generally not regarded as trial-related, bodily injury
Where there is an adverse reaction to an IP and the injury is caused by a procedure adopted to deal with that adverse reaction, compensation should be paid for such injury as if it were caused directly by the IP
Payment for medical expenses is made without acknowledgement of any legal liability and is thus to be understood to be an ex-gratia payment
The provision of insurance cover and payment of medical expenses does not mean that an injured participant may not pursue legal action against the sponsor for loss or harm not covered by the insurance; however, an argument that pain and suffering, loss of income, and other possible claims should be paid for by the sponsor’s insurer is not sound in South African law and will not succeed
The likelihood of an adverse reaction, or the fact that the participant has freely consented (whether in writing or otherwise) to participate in the trial should not exclude the participant from being eligible for compensation
According to the SA-GCPs and ZAF-26, the amount of compensation to be paid to the participant should be appropriate to the nature, severity, and persistence of the injury. The compensation should also be generally consistent with the amount of damages commonly awarded for similar injuries. The amount paid in compensation should be abated, or in certain circumstances excluded, in light of the following factors (which will depend on the risk level the participant can reasonably be expected to accept):

The seriousness of the disease being treated
The degree of probability that adverse reactions will occur and any warning given
The risks and benefits of the established treatments relative to those known or suspected of the trial medicines
ZAF-26 provides that in any case where the sponsor agrees to pay the participant, but the two (2) parties differ on what is the appropriate level of compensation, it is recommended that the sponsor agree to seek, at the sponsor’s own cost, the opinion of a mutually acceptable independent expert. This opinion should then be made available to the participant(s), and the expert’s opinion should be given substantial weight by the sponsor in reaching a decision on the payment amount.

Additionally, any participant claims pursuant to ZAF-26 should be made to the sponsor, preferably via the investigator. The participant should include details on the nature and background of the claim, which the sponsor should review expeditiously. The review process may be delayed if the participant requests an authority to examine any medical records relevant to the claim.

Trial Participation

As specified in the G-TIECompensation and the SA-GCPs, the sponsor or the designated representative is responsible for providing compensation to research participants. The SA-GCPs state that before the clinical phase of the trial commences, the EC must approve the documentation on participant compensation. Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the SA-GCPs, and the G-TIECompensation, compensation should be based on time, inconvenience, and expenses (TIE). In addition, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF and the SA-GCPs also address researcher requirements to budget for participant travel and other expenses. (See the G-EthicsHR-ZAF for detailed information).

The G-TIECompensation guides sponsors of approved clinical trials and proposes a model for minimum compensation that can be paid. It is not intended as an exclusive approach and the SAHPRA reserves the right to request any additional information. In addition, G-TIECompensation is not applicable to Phase I clinical trials, which pose a higher risk for participants and should be compensated on a different scale.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF explains that inducements (also known as incentives) may be offered in justified circumstances (e.g., where recruitment is anticipated to be difficult) to encourage participation and to express appreciation by offering gifts over and above reimbursement of expenses and compensation for time and inconvenience. Inducements are not necessarily cash but may take other forms like data or airtime vouchers, food vouchers, etc. Importantly, an inducement should not unfairly influence an informed choice about whether to participate or undermine a potential participant’s ability to assess the risk of harm. This is especially important for Phase I and First in Humans clinical trials where the circumstances may involve healthy people being offered significant payments over and above those outlined in the TIE method. All inducements should be clearly explained and justified to the EC. If there are community members on the EC, their input may be constructive regarding appropriate inducements.

Post-Trial Access

The G-PostCTAccess guides sponsors on when to consider post-trial or continued access (PTA/CA) to the IP following the trial’s conclusion. Only those participants who derive benefit from the IP will be considered (this excludes participants on standard of care, placebo, and registered medicines). Where appropriate and available, the possibility of PTA/CA should be disclosed to and discussed with potential participants during the initial informed consent process or via a separate consent process. Where appropriate and/or available, details of potential PTA/CA should be included in the clinical trial application form, informed consent form, and patient information leaflet. Additional considerations include the following:

PTA/CA is not applicable for Phase I and II studies. However, PTA/CA may be necessary for particular diseases (e.g., cancer or rare diseases).
PTA/CA should be considered for Phase III studies when there is no registered and marketed standard of care in South Africa, provided that data from interim or final analyses shows that access is clinically justifiable.
PTA/CA is not applicable to Phase IV studies
A minimum of four (4) years after completion of the study is recommended as the acceptable time period to provide PTA/CA to the participants, unless there are compelling reasons for determining otherwise.
During the PTA/CA period, the sponsor must ensure monitoring and oversight of participants using the IP.
Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

Per the SA-GCPs, the sponsor is responsible for implementing a quality management system to manage quality throughout the design, conduct, recording, evaluation, reporting, and archiving of clinical trials. This quality management system should adopt a risk-based approach for risk identification, evaluation, control, communication, and reporting. The sponsor should focus on trial activities that promote human participant protection and reliability of trial results, which include using qualified individuals, designating qualified medical personnel to respond to trial-related medical questions, and ensuring all aspects of the trial are operationally feasible and avoiding unnecessary complexity, procedures, and data collection. With respect to quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC), the sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining QA and QC systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, documented (recorded), and reported in compliance with the protocol, good clinical practice, and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).

Per the G-Monitor, the responsibility for adequate oversight of the conduct of a clinical trial, including the justification for and selection of monitoring methods, remains that of the sponsor solely.

Per the SA-GCPs, all parties involved in the conduct of a trial should be familiar with guidance in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZAF-27) and other international guidelines. Additionally, the investigator must agree to conduct the trial in compliance with the SA-GCPs, ZAF-27, South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) requirements, and the ethics committee (EC) approved protocol. In the event of an interpretation conflict between the SA-GCPs and an international guideline, the SA-GCPs take precedence.

Monitoring Requirements

In accordance with the SA-GCPs, the sponsor must conduct an independent audit to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, procedures, good clinical practice, and the applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor must appoint individuals who are independent of the clinical trials to conduct the audits and ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience to conduct audits properly. The sponsor's audit plan and procedures for a trial audit must be guided by the number of participants in the trial, the type and complexity of the trial, the level of risks to the trial participants, and any identified problem(s). Observations and findings of the auditors must be documented. The sponsor is responsible for obtaining agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, and reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities.

In addition, per the G-Monitor, the sponsor’s monitoring plan should include planned audits to ensure that monitoring activities are in accordance with the monitoring plan, applicable regulations, guidance, and the sponsor’s plans and policies.

As delineated in the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, researchers are expected to provide appropriate information to the EC to facilitate monitoring, including alerts and investigator brochures.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

Per the SA-GCPs, if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended for any reason, the investigator must promptly inform the trial participants and ensure appropriate therapy and follow-up for them. If the investigator, sponsor, institution, SAHPRA, or the EC terminate or suspend a trial, the investigator must promptly inform the other parties with a detailed written explanation for the termination or suspension. The sponsor is also responsible for ensuring that the South African National Clinical Trials Register (SANCTR) (ZAF-48) is updated as well.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF reiterates that if a project is terminated or suspended before the anticipated date of completion, then the researchers must report this immediately to the EC.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

Per the SA-GCPs, the sponsor must ensure that the electronic data processing system conforms to the specific documented requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance, and that standard operating procedures for using these systems are maintained. In addition, the sponsor must:

Ensure that the systems are designed to document data changes without deleting previously entered data (i.e., maintain an audit trail)
Maintain a security system that prevents unauthorized access to the data
Maintain a register of persons authorized to make data changes
Maintain adequate data backup
Ensure that blinding, if any, is maintained during data entry and processing
Ensure the integrity and confidentiality of data, including any that describe the context, content, and structure of the data – especially when making changes to computerized systems
If data are transformed during processing, it must be possible to compare the original data and observations with the processed data
Use an unambiguous participant identification code that allows identification of all data reported for each participant
Report any transfer of ownership of the data to the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA)
See the G-EthicsHR-ZAF for detailed ethical, legal, and security considerations for database storage and access.

Per the G-Monitor, when developing a study’s monitoring plan, the sponsor should consider how it uses electronic data capture (EDC) systems. EDC systems that are capable of assessing quality metrics in real time will help identify high-risk sites that need more intensive monitoring.

Records Management

As set forth in the SA-GCPs, the sponsor should inform the investigator(s) in writing of the need for record retention, and should notify these parties in writing when the trial related records are no longer needed. The sponsor, or other data owners, must retain all the sponsor-specific essential documents pertaining to the trial for not less than 10 years or until at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the investigational product (IP).

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: October 16, 2025
Responsible Parties

For the purposes of data protection requirements, the POPIA provides that the “responsible party” is a public or private body or any other person that, alone or in conjunction with others, determines the purpose of and means for processing personal information. In addition, an "information officer" is the designated head or deputy of a public or private body responsible for fulfilling the duties and functions related to personal information.

Data Protection

Per the POPIA, participants have the right to privacy, which includes a right to protection against the unlawful collection, retention, dissemination, and use of personal information by public and private bodies. This right to privacy is subject to justifiable limitations that are aimed at protecting other rights and interests (e.g., the right of access to information). Additional information on the rights of data subjects is provided in the POPIA.

The POPIA states that the responsible party must protect the constitutional right to privacy by safeguarding personal information when it is processed. The law provides conditions under which personal information may be gathered and processed.

Accountability – The responsible party must ensure that the conditions and all the measures in the POPIA are complied with at the time the purpose and means of processing is determined
Processing limitation – Personal information may only be processed in a fair and lawful manner and only with the consent of the data subject
Purpose specification – Personal information may only be processed for specific, explicitly defined, and legitimate reasons
Further processing limitation – Personal information may not be processed for a secondary purpose unless that processing is compatible with the original purpose
Information quality – The responsible party must take reasonable steps to ensure that the personal information collected is complete, accurate, not misleading, and updated where necessary
Openness – The data subject whose information you are collecting must be aware that you are collecting such personal information and for what purpose the information will be used
Security safeguards – Personal information must be kept secure against the risk of loss, unlawful access, interference, modification, unauthorized destruction and disclosure
Data subject participation – Data subjects may request whether their personal information is held, as well as the correction and/or deletion of any personal information held about them
The G-EthicsHR-ZAF reaffirms that data protection measures should be aligned with the requirements of the POPIA, including the conditions for cross-border transfer and sharing of health data. To ensure data processing is lawful, fair, and transparent, researchers should submit a data management plan to the ethics committee (EC), which covers how data will be collected, stored, accessed, shared, and disposed of or retained. The data management plan should indicate how it complies with the POPIA, how data security will be maintained and the processes for possible data breaches. If data-sharing options include the use of open-access databases, the selected databases must meet the minimum legal, ethical, and security requirements. See the G-EthicsHR-ZAF for additional guidance and analysis. Also see the Specimen Import & Export section for details on sharing human biological material (HBM) and HBM data.

The POPIA establishes a duty requiring a public or private body to register its Information Officer with the Information Regulator (South Africa) on the eServices platform (ZAF-14). Per the POPIA, the Information Officer is responsible for compliance with lawful processing of information and working with and responding to requests by the Regulator. Per the POPIA-Regs, the Information Officer has further responsibilities to:

Develop, implement, monitor, maintain, and continually improve a compliance framework
Conduct a personal information impact assessment to ensure compliance with the conditions for the lawful processing of personal information
Develop internal measures and systems to process requests for information or access
Conduct internal awareness sessions on protection of personal information requirements
As indicated in the POPIA-Regs, a data subject may object to the processing of personal information at any time during office hours and free of charge. The objection must be made on a form substantially similar to Form 1 (in the POPIA-Regs), and the responsible party must make the form reasonably accessible by hand, fax, post, email, SMS, WhatsApp, or any other expedient means. The responsible party must notify the data subject of the right to object when collecting personal information. If an objection is made telephonically, it must be electronically recorded and made available to the data subject upon request. In addition, a data subject may request the correction, destruction, or deletion of personal information at any time and free of charge, where the information is inaccurate, irrelevant, excessive, out of date, incomplete, misleading, obtained unlawfully, or no longer authorized to be retained. Requests must be made on a form substantially similar to Form 2 (in the POPIA-Regs), which must be reasonably accessible through various means, including hand delivery, fax, post, email, SMS, WhatsApp, or any expedient manner. If a request is made telephonically, the responsible party must record it and make it available on request. The responsible party must also notify the data subject in writing within 30 days of the action taken in response to the request. Also see ZAF-4 for voluntary guidance on complying with the POPIA and the POPIA-Regs.

The POPIA provides that records of personal information for research may be retained longer than is necessary for achieving the purpose for which the information was collected or processed if the responsible party has established appropriate safeguards against the records being used for any other purposes.

See ZAF-4 for voluntary guidance on complying with the POPIA, and ZAF-28 for more background on information officers. For additional guidance on processing personal data, including guidance on “special personal information” (e.g., health history) and personal information of children, see the Information Regulator website.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

Per the POPIA and the POPIA-Regs, personal information may only be processed if the data subject or legal representative/guardian consents to the processing. The responsible party bears the burden of proof for the consent. The data subject or legal representative/guardian may withdraw consent at any time if the lawfulness of the processing of personal information will not be affected.

As delineated in the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, consent to processing of personal information in terms of the POPIA requires a voluntary, specific, and informed expression of will, separate from the consent to participate in research. Special attention should be given to ensuring that computers and electronically stored data are protected from unauthorized access, inadvertent or accidental dissemination in the form of a ‘data dump’, etc. In general terms, a participant should know what personal information is being collected; why it is being collected; what will happen to it; how long it will be retained; whether it will identify the participant; whether it will be shared with others and why; whether it will be shared with third parties inside South Africa and why; and whether it will be sent outside South Africa and why. The participant should agree to these terms. Note that when processing some types of personal information, consent alone is insufficient as stipulated in the POPIA. Necessity must also be established with special personal information, such as information about a person’s race or ethnic origin, a person’s health or sex life, a person’s inherited characteristics (genetic makeup), biometric information, or children’s personal information.

Consent for Processing Personal Data of Minors

Per the POPIA, there is a general prohibition on the processing of personal information of a minor. However, a responsible party may process personal information concerning a minor if the processing meets one (1) of the following conditions:

It is carried out with the prior consent of a competent person
It is necessary for the establishment, exercise, or defense of a right or obligation in law
It is necessary to comply with an obligation of international public law
It is for historical, statistical, or research purposes to the extent that the purpose serves a public interest and the processing is necessary for the purpose concerned; or it appears to be impossible or would involve a disproportionate effort to ask for consent and the processing does not adversely affect the individual privacy of the child to a disproportionate extent
It is of personal information which has deliberately been made public by the minor with the consent of a competent person
As required in the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, when personal information about a minor (under 18 years) is to be processed, permission of a parent/legal guardian is required before data collection, even when permission is not required for the specific activity that gives rise to the information (e.g., donating blood). A minor aged 16 years or more may donate blood without parent/legal guardian permission, but the POPIA requires parent/legal guardian permission to process the information.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all South African clinical trials, a freely given, written informed consent is required to be obtained from each participant in accordance with the principles set forth in the NHA, the Declaration of Helsinki (ZAF-44), the SA-GCPs, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZAF-27).

As per the SA-GCPs and the G-GPHlthCare, the informed consent form (ICF) and patient information sheet(s) are essential documents that must be reviewed and approved by a registered ethics committee (EC) based in South Africa and provided to the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) with the clinical trial application. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.) The principal investigator (PI), or a person designated by the PI, should provide research study information to the participant or legal representative/guardian. When drafting and presenting the ICF, special consideration must be taken with regard to the participant’s culture, traditional values, intelligence, and education. The informed consent document should be non-technical and understandable to the participant and in a participant’s preferred written language. The ICF content should be briefly and clearly presented, without coercion or unduly influencing a potential participant to enroll in the clinical trial.

The SA-GCPs directs that none of the oral or written information concerning the study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or appear to waive their legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or the representatives from the sponsor’s liabilities for any negligence.

G-EthicsHR-ZAF explains that an important element of enabling an informed choice is the nature and quality of information made available to the potential participant, such as reading the information sheet and/or dialoguing with the participants, allowing for verbal consent, which is then recorded and transcribed or documented manually in the researchers’ notes. The process should permit sufficient time for consultation between the recruitment step and the time of deciding whether to participate. No person should be required to make an immediate decision. ECs should assess the proposed process for informed consent as well as the information that potential participants will be given and the measures to facilitate understanding. Considerations for assessment include whether:

The informed consent setting is sufficiently private and appropriate to minimize the possibility of undue influence
The person conducting the informed consent process is appropriately trained, independent, and bias-free
The text is in plain language and appropriate to the participants’ level of understanding with translations, as needed
Re-Consent

The G-GPHlthCare-IC states that the participant must be informed of any relevant new findings over the course of the study, and be given the choice to continue to participate or withdraw from the study. Per the SA-GCPs, written informed consent documentation and other participant-related information should be revised when new information that may be relevant to a participant’s consent or willingness to continue to participate in the trial becomes available. Any revisions must be submitted for ethics review and approval before implementation. Communication of the new information to participants must be documented.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the informed consent should be a trust-based process and relationship between the researcher and the participants, groups, and communities that extends over time. Consent must be negotiated and renegotiated as the research continues and develops.

Language Requirements

According to the SA-GCPs, the ICF should be provided in a participant’s preferred written language. The G-GPHlthCare states that the researchers should provide information to the participants in a language that the participant understands and in a manner that takes into account the participant’s level of literacy, understanding, values, and personal belief systems.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that informed consent material must be translated into the language(s) best suited for the population and context of the study. If appropriate, the consent documents can be translated. However, merely translating documents is insufficient to ensure that consent is informed because illiteracy is prevalent in some contexts, language dialects vary substantially across regions, some words and terminology are not easily translated, translated written materials may not be helpful to some participants, and/or professional translators are not content experts so mistranslation may occur. Therefore, it may be more useful to train a research assistant/interpreter who can explain information about the study verbally to potential participants in their language of choice and answer any questions they may have about the study.

Regarding the plain language text, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF indicates that the text should be appropriate to the participants’ level of understanding, which means:

Translated into the language(s) best suited for the population and context of the study
Has content, language(s), and procedures that are simplified and modified to accommodate any written or verbal language differences or impairments with which the participant may present
Free of jargon and unexplained acronyms
Clear and explains technical terminology
Documenting Consent

As stated in the SA-GCPs and the G-GPHlthCare, the ICF should be signed by the participant and the PI, or the person designated by the PI. If the participant is incapable of giving an informed consent, the legal representative/guardian should sign the ICF. The original signed ICF and patient information sheet(s) should be retained by the investigator and a copy should be given to the participant. The SA-GCPs requires an additional copy of the signed ICF and a source document identifying the study and recording the participation dates should be placed in the participant’s medical records. According to the NHA, the SA-GCPs, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the G-GPHlthCare, and the G-GPHlthCare-IC, in all cases, written informed consent must be obtained. Where the participant is illiterate and/or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, verbal consent should be obtained in the presence of and countersigned by a literate witness. The participant or legal representative/guardian, the PI or person designated by the PI, and if applicable, a literate witness must personally sign the ICF. Further, the SA-GCPs states that the participant should indicate willingness to participate by making a mark (either a cross or a fingerprint). The witness signs to affirm that the participant willingly consented to participate. The witness dates the mark and signature.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF indicates that there may be circumstances where alternative forms of obtaining consent are allowed when it is not possible to have written consent. If it is ethically justifiable for the specific circumstances, then verbal consent may be approved. Usually, if verbal consent is permitted, a witness attests that the person did consent to participation after indicating understanding of the information provided. In addition, sometimes the nature of the research requires electronic data collection, or the potential participants may have an impairment that prevents a personal face-to-face consent process with written consent. Alternatives to face-to-face personal consent may not occur without sound justification approved by a registered EC. The justification for an alternate format of consent process must be evidenced by clear descriptions of why an alternative is justified in the circumstances and how the interests of the potential participant are properly protected.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, where electronic consent is proposed, the research protocol must describe in detail the method and process for obtaining consent. Electronic signatures are a functional equivalent of a paper-based signature with the same legal authority if it meets legal requirements including:

A typed name at the end of an email
A scanned image of a handwritten signature embedded into a document
A digital signature
Further, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that in regards to telephonic (verbal) and electronic informed consent, EC reviewers of research protocols must insist on a proper decisive description of how informed consent will be regarded as authentic. The following electronic methods of obtaining informed consent are recommended:

Telephonic recruitment for research that poses more than minimal risk of harm should be limited to screening for eligibility, followed by face-to-face informed consent, or virtual informed consent via an electronic platform
Telephonic research surveys are possible for minimal risk studies, and verbal agreement to participate serves as informed consent
For research that poses more than minimal risk of harm, different electronic platforms could be used for different purposes: a technology (e.g., email) to screen and obtain informed consent and another system to collect data
Waiver of Consent

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, any decision by the EC to grant a waiver of participant or legal representative/guardian consent must be documented and must include the justification for the decision. A waiver of consent to conduct the research can be justified on two (2) grounds: if the waiver will not infringe upon any right of a participant, and obtaining consent is impracticable; or if the rights infringement is minimal and is outweighed by the expected social value of the research, and obtaining consent is impracticable. Any decision by the EC to grant a waiver of participant or legal representative/guardian consent must be documented and must include the justification for the decision. A waiver of consent is not automatic and requires a researcher to apply to the EC for approval to use someone's personal information or personal health information without obtaining consent from the individual. The application must explain why a waiver is requested and how one of the justification criteria above applies. The EC must assess the level of risk of harm associated with a waiver, which refers to the risk of harm flowing from researchers accessing identifiable private information and not to risk of harm concerning the whole research project. An alteration of requirements for informed consent (as opposed to a full waiver) is possible, e.g., when existence of a signed consent form might pose a risk of harm (breach of confidentiality) to the participant in studies involving illegal behavior. The alteration may take the form of permitting unsigned informed consent documentation.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Based on the informed consent essential elements in the SA-GCPs, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the G-GPHlthCare, G-PostCTAccess, and the NHAParticipants, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study involves research and an explanation of its nature and purpose, including that it conforms to the protocol
The procedures to be followed and their purpose and nature
Why the potential participant has been approached, their responsibilities, and the research-related activities and procedures that the participant is being asked to consent to
Who the researchers are, the nature of their expertise, and their responsibilities
The aspects of the clinical trial that are experimental
Any foreseeable risks or discomforts to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant; information should include the probability and magnitude of the foreseeable risks of harm
The measures to be taken to minimize risk of harm
Any benefits to the participant or to others that may reasonably be expected from the research both during and after the research; if no benefit is expected, the participant should also be made aware of this
A disclosure of appropriate alternative procedures or treatments, and their potential benefits and risks
The probability for random assignment to each treatment
Participation is voluntary, the participant may withdraw at any time without explanation or prejudice, and refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits, or reduction in the level of care to which the participant is otherwise entitled
Compensation and/or medical treatment available to the participant in the event of a trial-related injury
The planned incentives, if any, to attract the participant and the planned reimbursements, if any, for time, inconvenience, and expenses
The extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained, the possibility of record access by the sponsor, the ethics committee (EC), or the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA)
How the personal information of participants, including confidentiality of data collected during the research, will be protected
Who will have access to participants' information, biological samples and associated data, including whether samples will be shared with other researchers
That participants may request that corrections to their information be made or that their information or samples be deleted or destroyed; in cases where withdrawal of samples and information is not possible, the potential limitations and consequences of not withdrawing samples and data from research should be explained
Instances where a legal obligation to disclose information may arise
Statement that participants may contact the EC at the contact details provided if they have questions or complaints about their rights and welfare
The sponsor’s identity
Potential conflicts of interest of the principal investigator (PI)
The consequences of a participant's decision to withdraw from the study
Information about approval from a registered EC and SAHPRA
Information about the EC monitoring the clinical trial
The approximate number of participants in the research study, locally and globally
The expected duration of participation
Whether feedback about the study will be provided and, if so, how it will be provided
Whether biological samples will be used for commercial benefit
Where relevant, whether incidental findings will be shared with participants
An explanation of whom to contact in the event of research-related injury
A statement that participants may contact the researcher at the contact details provided if they have questions about the research project
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without consent
The research may be terminated early in particular circumstances
The participant or legal representative/guardian will be notified if significant new findings developed during the study which may affect the participant's willingness to continue
Information on post-trial or continued access (PTA/CA)
Whether data and/or samples can be used after the person’s death, especially if it is possible that the person may die during the study
Description of a measure to probe understanding and comprehension of the information is planned (e.g., a teach-back method), and how it proposes to do so especially for very vulnerable potential participants.
See the Vulnerable Populations and Consent for Specimen sections for further information.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Overview

South Africa’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research study participants. In accordance with the principles held forth in the Declaration of Helsinki (ZAF-44), the SA-GCPs, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the G-GPHlthCare, the G-GPHlthCare-IC, the NHAParticipants, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZAF-27), a participant’s rights must be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process. Below are the basic rights for participants in clinical research studies. (See the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.)

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

According to the NHA and the NHAParticipants, everyone has the right to participate in any decision affecting their health or treatment, including research. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

According to the G-GPHlthCare-IC, a potential research study participant has the right to be fully informed on the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, the sponsor and investigator(s), any potential benefits or risks, study procedures, any compensation for participation, injury and/or treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study. (See the Required Elements section for a more detailed list.)

Per POAIA, a participant may seek access to their clinical trial records, pursuant to their constitutional right of access to any information held by the State or by another person.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

Per the G-GPHlthCare-IC, participants have the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement identifying this right. It is the responsibility of the investigator to safeguard the confidentiality of research data to protect the identity and records of research participants.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

Per the G-GPHlthCare-IC, the research participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the investigator(s), and the ethics committee to address clinical trial-related queries, in the event of any injury and/or to appeal against a violation of the participant’s rights. It is also required that the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) address and contact information be provided. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The SA-GCPs and ZAF-44 clearly state that research participants have the right to safety and well-being, which must take precedence over the interest of science and society. The NHA and the NHAParticipants safeguard the rights of all South Africans including vulnerable populations.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
The NHA and the G-EthicsHR-ZAF make provisions to protect the rights of a research participant during the informed consent process when the procedure is complicated by medical emergencies. As per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, there are emergency situations that merit use of deferred consent (also called delayed consent). Usually, the circumstances entail a temporary loss of decision-making capacity and a reasonably held prognosis that the person will regain the capacity within a predictable period (e.g., an unconscious patient in the Emergency Unit who is predicted to regain consciousness within hours). Deferred consent should be used only where the likelihood of obtaining personal informed consent after the research has begun is likely. The ethics committee (EC) may approve use of deferred consent if the following conditions are met:

The proposed research is based on valid scientific hypotheses that support a reasonable possibility of more benefit than that offered by standard care
The individual has a temporary loss of decision-making capacity
There is a reasonably held prognosis that they will regain the capacity within a predictable period
Participation is not contrary to the medical interests of the patient
When the individual regains capacity to make decisions, they must be informed that they have been enrolled in a research study (i.e., deferred consent must be obtained); if they object to having been enrolled in the study, this counts as a refusal to participate, and they should be asked whether their data already collected must be withdrawn
If death of the participant occurs before deferred consent can be obtained, it should not be assumed that continued use of the data and/or samples is ethical. The deceased’s wishes or those of their proxy or mandate holder should be ascertained.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, during disease outbreaks, potential participants must be assisted to understand the research proposed and the implications of enrollment, despite the situational duress and anxiety. The notion that informed consent is a process does not change because the research is being conducted in pandemic circumstances. Research during a public health emergency must adhere to standard research ethics principles including informed consent.

Per the G-CTAPHEmerg, the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) states that during a public health emergency, informed consent and the patient information sheet(s) remain essential documents that must be reviewed and approved by an EC and provided to the SAHPRA with the clinical trial application.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Overview

The NHA, the SA-GCPs, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the G-GPHlthCare, and the NHAParticipants require special considerations for vulnerable populations, and characterize them by limited education, limited economic resources, inadequate protection of human rights, discrimination due to health status, limited ability to provide informed consent, limited availability of health care and treatment options, or an inadequate understanding of scientific research. Vulnerable populations include children/minors, mentally and physically disabled, pregnant women, substance abusers, prisoners, armed forces, the homeless, the elderly, members of a group with a hierarchical structure, patients with incurable diseases, persons in nursing homes, unemployed or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, nomads, refugees, and other vulnerable groups such as persons in dependent relationships. (Note: Each of the items listed above will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements).

The SA-GCPs state that ethics committees (ECs) must pay special attention to protecting participants from vulnerable populations. The ECs may impose additional measures such as imposing additional protective measures for the informed consent process or requiring increased monitoring and interim reporting on the participants’ welfare. As per the NHAParticipants, research with vulnerable participants must comply with the following requirements:

Involve vulnerable persons only when non-vulnerable persons are not appropriate for inclusion
Not systematically avoid inclusion of vulnerable participants because it is unfairly discriminatory, and would prevent this population from benefiting from relevant research
Be responsive to health needs and priorities of vulnerable persons, and
Provide special attention in the ethical review to ensure research-related risks are assessed and minimized, and appropriate consent procedures are followed
Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, where factors usually associated with vulnerability are integral to the research, the protocol should demonstrate how vulnerability will be managed. In cases where the researcher is known to the community and speaks the local language and/or is accepted as part of that community, this may be seen as a positive element for the research context. Special care should be exercised before undertaking research involving participants in such communities, and ECs should ensure that:

Persons in these communities are not being involved in the research merely because they are expediently accessible, while the research is feasible to undertake in a less vulnerable community
Research is relevant to the needs and priorities of the targeted community
Research participants know they will take part in research and that the research will be carried out only with appropriate consent
See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations.

Persons in Dependent Relationships or Hierarchical Situations

As indicated in the SA-GCPs and the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, participants whose proposed involvement in research arises from dependent or hierarchical relationships need additional attention, and particular attention should be given to ensuring that their consent is both adequately informed and voluntary. In addition, per the NHAParticipants, research is appropriate when research-related risks of harm are minimized. These types of relationships include, but are not limited to, those who are in junior or subordinate positions in hierarchically structured groups, such as prisoners and prison authorities, older persons and their caregivers, and patients and healthcare professionals.

Persons Highly Dependent on Medical Care

Per G-EthicsHR-ZAF, individuals who are highly dependent on medical care deserve special attention when considering research participation. The gravity of their medical condition may require invasive measures that carry increased risk of harm. The quality of informed consent may be compromised by the effect the medical condition has on the participant’s decision-making or communication abilities. A patient may be reluctant to refuse consent for fear that this may compromise their medical treatment. Adequate provision must be made for informing patients and their relatives about the research to ensure that stress and other emotional factors do not impair their understanding. Their dependency on caregivers should not unfairly affect research participation decisions.

Persons with Physical Disabilities

As described in the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, recruitment strategies for research participation should be sensitive to the possibility that persons with visual, hearing, or mobility impairments may wish to volunteer, and, therefore, should ensure that there are no unintended barriers to such participation (e.g., the absence of ramps or a lift for wheelchair-bound potential participants). Research involving participants with physical disabilities should anticipate possible barriers and include measures to minimize them.

Elderly Persons

As per the G-GPHlthCare, research involving elderly persons requires consent to be provided by the participant’s legal representative/guardian on that person's behalf. Because of their vulnerability, the elderly should not be included in research unless the research is necessary to promote the health of this population and unless this research cannot instead be performed on legally competent persons.

Research Involving Collectivities

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, a collectivity is a term used to distinguish some distinct groups from informal communities, commercial, or social groups. Collectivities are persons who participate in research in groups distinguished by common beliefs, values, social structures, and other features that identify them as a separate group; customary collective decision-making according to tradition and beliefs; the custom that leaders express a collective view; and members of the collectivity being aware of common activities and common interests. Research involves a collectivity when property or information private to the group as a whole is studied or used; permission of people occupying positions of authority is required; and participation of members acknowledged as representatives is involved. Among other requirements, research involving collectivities should include measures to ensure an informed consent process for individual participants.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
The SA-GCPs and G-EthicsHR-ZAF stipulate that minors are younger than 18 years old and are regarded as vulnerable persons due to their lack of legal capacity. The G-GPHlthCare-IC states that a person over the age of 18 years is an adult and is legally competent to decide on all forms of treatment and medical procedures. However, a minor who is 12 years of age and older is legally competent to consent to a proposed investigation if the minor is of sufficient maturity and is able to understand the benefits, risks, social, and other implications of the research. A minor's refusal to participate in research must be respected.

Per the SA-GCPs, documented permission from the parent/legal guardian must be obtained in advance prior to approaching the minor to request participation. According to the NHA, the SA-GCPs, the G-GPHlthCare, and the G-GPHlthCare-IC, consent for minors to participate in research must be obtained from:

The parent/legal guardian in all but exceptional circumstances (such as emergencies)
The minor/child who is competent to make the decision
Any organization or person required by law (defined in the NHA)
Where the minor/child is not competent, assent from the minor/child and consent from the parent/legal guardian
According to the NHA, where research or experimentation is to be conducted on a minor for therapeutic purposes, the study may only be conducted when:

It is in the best interests of the minor
It is carried out in such manner and on such conditions as may be prescribed
The consent of the minor’s parent/legal guardian is provided
Where research or experimentation is to be conducted on a minor for non-therapeutic purposes, the NHA, the NHAParticipants, the SA-GCPs, and the G-MinisterConsent state that a study may only be conducted when:

It is carried out in such manner and on such conditions as may be prescribed
The consent of the Minister of Health is provided, or, where appropriate, consent from a delegated authority
The consent of the minor’s parent/legal guardian is provided
The consent of the minor is provided when the minor is capable of understanding
The G-EthicsHR-ZAF further indicates that the following are minimum conditions for an ethics committee (EC) to approve research with minors:

Their participation is scientifically essential to the research and investigate a problem of relevance to minors, and the protocol should provide sufficient information to justify why minors should be included as participants
Minors should only participate in research where such research poses acceptable risks of harm
Research involving minors must be reviewed appropriately, including pediatric or child research specialists as reviewers
Registered ECs’ deliberations are properly documented in minutes and recorded and include EC members with appropriate minor research experience
Minors should participate in research only when the required written permissions from the parent/legal guardian have been obtained
When a parent/legal guardian gives permission for their minor to choose whether to participate in research, this permission is given based on a detailed description of all diagnostic and therapeutic interventions that will affect the minor in the study
The informed consent documentation must explain whether results of tests will be made known to minor participants and their parents
The minor’s interest in confidentiality must be respected
The minor’s privacy interests are considered
Research involving minors must respect their evolving capacity to give consent
Researchers must familiarize themselves with the legal obligations to report minor abuse and neglect
See the NHAParticipants and G-EthicsHR-ZAF for detailed application requirements.

In addition, per the G-MinisterConsent, the Minister of Health may not give consent if any of the following circumstances apply:

The study objective(s) can also be achieved if conducted on an adult
The research is unlikely to significantly improve scientific understanding of the minor’s condition, disease, or disorder to such an extent that it will result in significant benefit to the minor(s)
The reasons for the consent to the research by the parent/legal guardian and, if applicable, the minor, are contrary to public policy
The research poses a significant risk to the health of the minor
The risk to the health or well-being of the minor is not significantly outweighed by the potential benefit
For more information on ministerial consent for non-therapeutic health research with minors, see the operational guidelines at the G-MinisterConsent.

Assent Requirements

The SA-GCPs requires the EC to ensure that adequate steps outlined in the clinical protocol are used to obtain a minor’s assent when, in the EC’s judgment, the minor is capable of providing such assent. When the EC determines that assent is required, it must also indicate whether and how such assent should be documented. A minor’s assent should not be assumed simply because of failure to object during the informed consent process. It is necessary for the minor and the parent/legal guardian to be in agreement on participation. The minor’s refusal to participate is final.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the parent/legal guardian does not choose for the minor who has factual capacity to choose, rather, the parent/guardian gives permission for the minor to choose (i.e., to assent to participation). Where a minor is very young (less than seven (7) years old) or is factually incapable of exercising a choice, then the parent/legal guardian chooses whether the minor should participate. When ECs review protocols that involve minors, it is critical to consider whether the required written permissions have been obtained, including assent from the minor in writing preferably (i.e., agreement to participate) if they choose to participate.

See the Personal Data Protection section for requirements on processing personal data of minors.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
As per the NHA and the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, any research studies involving pregnant women, women who may become pregnant, or fetuses, require additional safeguards to ensure the research conforms to appropriate ethical standards and upholds societal values. The ethics committee (EC) must provide particular attention to these participants due to the potential for additional health concerns that may arise during pregnancy, and the need to avoid unnecessary risk to the fetus.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that any proposed exclusion of women participants must be justifiable in light of research priorities as well as the specific research question under consideration. Systematic class exclusion must be guarded against to avoid unfair participant selection. Additional health concerns arise during pregnancy, including the need to avoid unnecessary risk to the embryo, fetus, or infant; however, automatic exclusion of pregnant women should be avoided to prevent data inequities for pregnant and nursing women. Researchers and ECs should exercise extra caution when women participants are or may become pregnant. Exclusion of women from research may be justifiable to protect the health of the embryo, fetus, or infant and if exclusion is scientifically supportable. The informed consent documents must explain carefully and fully what the effects of the research activities on the embryo, fetus, or infant might be. Usually, research involving pregnant women should be undertaken when:

The purpose of the proposed research is to meet the health needs of the mother of the embryos, fetuses, or infants
Appropriate studies on animals and nonpregnant women have been completed
The risk of harm to the embryo, fetus, or infant is minimal, when procedures or interventions have no potential individual benefit for the women or embryo, fetus, or infant
The risk of harm is outweighed by the prospect of potential individual benefit, when procedures or interventions have potential individual benefit for the women or embryo, fetus, or infant
In all cases, inclusion poses the least risk of harm possible for achieving the objectives of the research
The SA-GCPs stipulates that pregnant women, women planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding women are usually excluded from human clinical trials where a new chemical entity (NCE) or medicines with no information on safety in pregnancy/lactation are investigated for treatment of a particular disease/condition or disorder. However, when safety and other relevant information is available, pregnant or breastfeeding women should be included in clinical trials to ensure that appropriate knowledge about NCEs for this group is developed.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
According to the NHA, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, and the NHAParticipants, a prisoner may not, even with consent, participate in any scientific experimentation, research study, or clinical trial except under limited conditions. Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, prisoners are considered a vulnerable class of persons because of the potential effect of incarceration on the voluntariness of the decision to participate in research. Neither coercion nor undue influence is acceptable in the informed consent process. Researchers should pay attention to whether their intended participants are prisoners who are awaiting trial or are convicted as different ethical issues arise for each group. The recruitment strategy design must pay careful attention to how coercion and undue influence will be avoided. Similarly, persons administering questionnaires or conducting interviews must be conscious of environmental factors that may influence voluntariness. The ethics committee (EC) should include, at least on an ad-hoc basis, a member with experience and knowledge of working with prisoners when deliberating on the protocol.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, research should be conducted on prisoners only if:

Their participation is indispensable to the research
The research cannot be conducted with non-prisoners
The research concerns a problem of relevance to prisoners
Sound informed consent processes can be ensured
Engagement with relevant role players about the proposed research has occurred
Generally, it is unlikely that independent consent by minor prisoners will be justifiable.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
According to the NHA, the SA-GCPs, the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the G-GPHlthCare, and the NHAParticipants, sufficient justification must be provided for any research or treatment involving a participant who has a mental or intellectual impairment or substance abuse related disorder, and the research must be relevant to the mental disability or substance abuse disorder.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, research involving adults with incapacity should be approved only if:

The research, including observational research, is not contrary to the best interest of the individual
The risk of harm assessment shows that the research, including observational research, places the incapacitated adult at no more than minimal risk
The research involves greater than minimal risk but provides the prospect of direct benefit for the incapacitated adult; the degree of risk must be justified by the potential benefit
The research, including observational research, involves greater than minimal risk, with no prospect of direct benefit for the incapacitated adult, but has a high probability of providing generalizable knowledge (i.e., the risk should be justified by the risk-knowledge ratio)
Greater than minimal risk must represent no more than a minor increase over minimal risk
Where appropriate, the person assents to participation (Note that the incapacitated person’s refusal or resistance to participate, as indicated by words or behavior, takes precedence over permission by a proxy)
As delineated in the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, proxy decision-makers for incapacitated adults are not permitted in South African law unless the proxy is a court appointed curator or holds a statutory mandate to make health care decisions for the now incapacitated person pursuant to the NHA. Incapacity may not be assumed but requires independent and objective assessment by appropriately trained persons. If the research participant regains capacity to make decisions, they must be informed that they have been enrolled in a research study. If they object to having been enrolled in the research study, this counts as a refusal to participate, and their data must be withdrawn. If the participant does not object, personal consent may be desirable depending on the length and complexity of the study.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
As delineated in the SA-GCPs and the PIC-S-GMP-Guide (which South Africa adopted pursuant to the SA-GMPs), an investigational product is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes:

A product with a marketing authorization when used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form
When used for an unapproved indication
When used to gain further information about an approved use
Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Manufacturing

According to the SA-GMPs and the GRMRSA, the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) in South Africa. As delineated in the G-ManuImpExp, a manufacturer’s license for IPs is required for both total and partial manufacture, and for the various processes of dividing up, packaging, or presentation, in accordance with the MRSA. To obtain a license, the application form (ZAF-55) should be emailed to SAHPRA at gmplicensing@sahpra.org.za, accompanied by the following information:

Proof of payment
Existing SAHPRA license for renewal and amendment applications
Cover letter
Site Master File
Signed declaration
SAHPRA inspection resolution
Intellectual property documentation
Department of Health premises license
Registration of responsible pharmacist
South African Pharmacy Council (SAPC) Record of a Pharmacy
SAPC Record of a Pharmacy Owner
Municipal Approval/Zoning Certificate
Per ZAF-55, the license is valid for five (5) years and the application to renew the license must be submitted at least 180 days before the expiration of the current license.

In addition, per ZAF-23, a clinical trial application to SAHPRA must include a certificate of good manufacturing practice (GMP) for manufacture of the IP(s). The SA-GCPs also states that the sponsor must ensure that the IP (including active comparator and placebo, if applicable) is manufactured in accordance with applicable GMP standards.

Pursuant to the SA-GMPs, South Africa adopted the PIC-S-GMP-Guide for the manufacturing of therapeutic goods. The PIC-S-GMP-Guide includes requirements for a Certificate of Analysis to be issued by the manufacturer for all IPs to be used in a clinical trial. For GMP agreements with competent international regulatory authorities, the SA-GMPs states that these agreements do not permit automatic acceptance but may be used to enhance regulatory oversight and compliance. SAHPRA may request additional documentation and/or schedule an inspection to ensure GMP compliance. The following conditions demonstrate GMP compliance:

The site has been approved by a recognized regulatory authority (RA) within the previous three (3) years
The dosage form of the IP within the application is within the same dosage form grouping as the dosage form approved by the RA
The product type applied for is the same as the product type approved by the recognized RA
The activities applied for by the applicant are the same activities that have been approved by the recognized regulator
Import

The SA-GCPs states that IPs may be imported into South Africa only after approval of the protocol by SAHPRA. Samples of the IP to be imported before trial approval require a SAHPRA license under MRSA. The sponsor must ensure that the IP (including active comparator and placebo, if applicable) is manufactured in accordance with any applicable GMP standards. Per G-ManuImpExp to import an IP, the applicant must submit an application form (ZAF-55) to SAHPRA.

The CTA-Import indicates that there have been delays in the release of IPs at the SAHPRA border control because the import licenses (clinical trial approval letters) have not specified the quantities of study medication authorized for importation. To address this problem, a protocol amendment application (ZAF-20) is required to request the approval of the remaining study medication to be imported for these specific trials. Applicants will be allowed six (6) months from the date of the CTA-Import (i.e., from September 19, 2024) to obtain the necessary approvals.

Per the G-ImprtPorts, SAHPRA’s Regulatory Compliance Unit is responsible for ensuring that health products at ports of entry meet importation requirements under MRSA, including for IPs. Imported IPs must be accompanied by the certificate of registration that proves authorization under the MRSA.

Please note: South Africa is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (ZAF-8), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see ZAF-34.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

In accordance with the SA-GCPs, the sponsor is responsible for ensuring an up-to-date Investigator’s Brochure (IB) is available to the investigator; investigators must provide it to the responsible ethics committee (EC). In the case of an investigator-sponsored trial, the sponsor-investigator must determine whether an IB is available from the commercial manufacturer.

The SA-GCPs states that the IB should contain the following sections, each with literature references where appropriate:

Table of Contents
Summary: A brief summary (preferably not exceeding two (2) pages) to highlight the significant physical, chemical, pharmaceutical, pharmacological, toxicological, pharmacokinetic, metabolic, and clinical information available that is relevant to the stage of clinical development of the investigational product (IP)
A brief introductory statement with the chemical name (and generic and trade name for an approved product) of the IP, all active ingredients in the IP, its pharmacological class and expected position within this class (e.g., advantages), the rationale for conducting research with the IP, and the anticipated prophylactic, therapeutic, and/or diagnostic indications. Also include a description of the general approach to be followed in evaluating the IP.
Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation parameters
Pre-clinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects of IP in humans (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; regulatory and postmarketing experiences)
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator(s)
Quality Management

As defined in the SA-GCPs, the sponsor must ensure that IPs are manufactured in accordance with good manufacturing practice (GMPs), including the requirements in Annex 13 of the PIC-S-GMP-Guide (which South Africa adopted pursuant to the SA-GMPs). (See Product Management section for additional information on IP supply, storage, and handling requirements). As indicated in ZAF-23, the following information must be furnished in the clinical trial application:

Whether the IP contains an active substance of chemical origin or of biological/biotechnological origin
IP name(s) and details (e.g., formulation(s) and strength(s))
Properties of the IP (e.g., mechanism of action)
Summary of pre-clinical findings (e.g., laboratory, animal, toxicity, or mutagenicity)
Summary of clinical findings
Comparator product(s) name(s) and details
Concomitant name(s) and details including rescue medications
Registration status of IP, concomitant, and/or comparator medicine(s); include the IB, South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA)-approved principal investigator (PI), and other international professional information (package inserts) if not approved in South Africa, and a Certificate of Analysis (CoA)
Whether the IP is modified in relation to its original registration for the purpose of the clinical trial
Estimated quantity of trial material (each drug detailed separately) for which exemption will be required, including for concomitant medicines to be imported
Explanation for use of imported drugs when the same product is available in South Africa
Details of receiving the drugs from supplier including storage, dispensing, and packaging of drugs
Details of intention to register the IP or explain if registration is not envisioned
Details of the manufacture, quality control, and stability of the IP (including IP destruction process) and include GMP certificate
Previous studies using this medicine that have been approved by the SAHPRA, including the SAHPRA approval number, study title, protocol number, date of approval, national PI/PI, date(s) of progress report(s), and date of final report
See ZAF-23 for detailed instructions on IP submission requirements.

Per the PIC-S-GMP-Guide (which South Africa adopted pursuant to the SA-GMPs), the release of IPs should not occur until after the authorized person has certified that the relevant requirements have been met. CoAs should be issued for each batch of intermediate or active pharmaceutical ingredient, on request. CoAs should be dated and signed by authorized personnel of the quality unit(s) and should show the name, address, and telephone number of the original manufacturer. See the PIC-S-GMP-Guide for certification requirements.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in South Africa must comply with the requirements set forth in the SA-GCPs, the GRMRSA, MRSA, and the PIC-S-GMP-Guide (which South Africa adopted pursuant to the SA-GMPs). The GRMRSA states that for an IP to be used in a clinical trial, it must be properly labeled in English and at least one (1) other official language, and should appear in clearly legible and indelible letters. As set forth in the PIC-S-GMP-Guide, the following labeling information must be included on both the outer packaging and the immediate container:

The name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor, contract research organization (CRO), or investigator
The pharmaceutical dosage form, route of administration, quantity of dosage units, and in the case of open trials, the name/identifier and strength/potency
The batch and/or code number to identify the contents and packaging operation
A trial reference code allowing identification of the trial, site, investigator, and sponsor (if not given elsewhere)
The trial participant identification number/treatment number and where relevant, the visit number
The investigator name (if not already included above)
Directions for use (reference may be made to a leaflet or other explanatory document intended for the trial participant or person administering the product)
“For clinical trial use only” or similar wording
The storage conditions
The period of use (use-by date, expiration date, or re-test date as applicable), in month/year format and in a manner that avoids any ambiguity
“Keep out of reach of children” except when the product is for use in trials where the product is not taken home by the participant
In addition, precautions against mislabeling should be intensified by trained staff (e.g., label reconciliation, line clearance, and in-process control checks by appropriately trained staff).

The SA-GCPs specify that in blinded trials, the IP should be coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding. The IP(s) coding system should include a mechanism that permits rapid IP(s) identification in case of a medical emergency but does not permit undetectable breaks of the blinding.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

As defined in the SA-GCPs, the sponsor is responsible for supplying a sufficient quantity of the investigational product (IP) after the sponsor obtains study approvals from the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) and the ethics committee (EC). The sponsor must ensure that written procedures include instructions and relevant documents for the investigator to follow for handling and storage of the IP for the trial. The procedures must address adequate and safe receipt, handling, storage, dispensing, retrieval of unused product from participants, and return of unused IP to the sponsor (or alternative disposition if authorized by the sponsor and in compliance with the SAHPRA-approved protocol). In addition, the sponsor must:

Ensure timely delivery of the IP to the investigator
Maintain records that document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP
Maintain a system for retrieving the IP and then documenting such retrieval (e.g., for deficient product recall, reclaim after trial completion, and expired product reclaim)
Maintain a system for disposal of unused IP and for its documentation
Take steps to ensure that the IP is stable over the period of use
Maintain sufficient quantities of the IP used in the trials to reconfirm specifications, if necessary, and maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics; to the extent that IP stability permits, samples should be retained until analyses of trial data are complete or as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), whichever is longer
Provide and maintain a system for retrieving and disposing of trial-related waste (e.g., syringes and needles)
Per the SA-GCPs, the sponsor should determine acceptable temperatures, conditions, times for IP storage, reconstitution fluids/procedures, and devices for product infusion, if any, that comply with the SA-GPPs. The sponsor must inform all parties involved (e.g., monitors, investigators, pharmacists, storage managers) of these determinations.

The SA-GCPs specify that if significant formulation changes are made in the IP(s) or comparator product(s) during the course of clinical development, the results of any studies of the newly formulated product(s) should be made available prior to its use in the clinical trial. Refer to the SA-GCPs for detailed sponsor-related IP requirements.

Regarding packaging, the PIC-S-GMP-Guide indicates that IPs are normally packed individually for each participant in the clinical trial. The number of units to be packaged should be specified prior to the start of the packaging operations, including units necessary for carrying out quality control and any retention samples to be kept. Sufficient reconciliations should take place to ensure the correct quantity of each product required has been accounted for at each stage of processing. During packaging, the risk of product mix up must be minimized by using appropriate procedures and/or, specialized equipment as appropriate and relevant staff training. The packaging must ensure that the IP remains in good condition during transport and storage at intermediate destinations. Any opening or tampering of the outer packaging during transport should be readily discernible. Similarly, the SA-GCPs state that the IPs must be suitably packaged in a manner that will prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage.

Record Requirements

Per the SA-GCPs, the sponsor, or other data owners, must retain all essential documents pertaining to the trial for not less than 10 years or until at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the IP. In addition, the sponsor should obtain the investigator’s agreement to retain trial-related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution that these documents are no longer needed.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
In South Africa, the NHARegMicroLabs refers to a specimen as a “diagnostic specimen,” and defines it as any human or animal material, including excreta, secreta, blood and its components, tissue or tissue fluids, that is to be used for the purpose of diagnosis, but does not include live infected animals. The NHABiol and the G-EthicsHR-ZAF define “human biological materials (HBM)” as material from a human being, including DNA, RNA, blastomeres, polar bodies, cultured cells, embryos, gametes, progenitor stem cells, small tissue biopsies, and growth factors from the same. The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that blood and blood products are also included pursuant to NHASpecAmend. The NHABloodCells generally refers to substances of human origin as biological substances.

Please refer to the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, the NHABiol, the NHA, the NHABloodCells, the NHATissue, and the NHAStemCell for more specific definitions of selected terms including blood, cultured cells, embryonic tissue, human tissue, plasma, stem cell, and genetic material.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
Import/Export

Per the NHA, the MTA-Human, the NHABloodCells, the NHARegMicroLabs, the NHATissue, and the NHAStemCell, a permit must be obtained from the National Department of Health (NDOH) Director General to import or export human biological material (HBM). Both the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) approval letter and the NDOH import/export permit must be included with each HBM shipment. See also the Submission Content section for information on completing a clinical trial application. (Note that HBM is referred to as a “biological substance” in the older South African regulations (e.g., the NHABloodCells); this summary will hereinafter use HBM to refer to human biological material, specimens, and biological substances.)

As set forth in the NHA, the NHABloodCells, the NHARegMicroLabs, the NHATissue, and the NHAStemCell, the NDOH Director-General, as delegated by the NDOH Minister, is responsible for establishing regulations related to the import and export of HBM. In addition, only the Minister can authorize an institution or hospital to import or export HBM for research purposes.

In accordance with the NHA, the NHABloodCells, the NHARegMicroLabs, the NHATissue, and the NHAStemCell, the NDOH Director-General reviews and approves all import or export requests by an institution or hospital. These requests must be submitted in writing using the application forms that may be obtained by contacting the NDOH Permit Programme at importexportpermit@health.gov.za. The forms also appear as Annexures 1-6 in the NHABloodCells and Form 1 in the NHARegMicroLabs.

Upon review of the application, the Director-General will issue a permit or certificate authorizing the import or export request if the Director-General is satisfied that the submission meets the NHA, the NHABloodCells, the NHARegMicroLabs, the NHATissue, and the NHAStemCell requirements, as applicable. The permit will contain an expiration date for the approved HBM.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, sharing HBM and data about HBM must comply with the POPIA and may not occur unless:

The recipient is in a country that has similar legal protections for processing of personal information
For situations where the recipient is in a country that does not have an adequate level of protection, prior authorization has been obtained or there is a code of conduct in place
The data subject has consented specifically to the intended transborder data sharing
The transfer is necessary in terms of a contract or for the benefit of the data subject
In addition, per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, ethics committees (ECs) should consider the following during the review process for proposed HBM and HBM data sharing:

The recipient of such data should have the necessary research approvals to use the data for research purposes
The recipient should comply with the POPIA requirements, have clear processes to deal with possible data breaches, and must inform the provider and EC should a breach occur
The recipient must specify the timeframe for storage of the data and its destruction, where relevant
Any proposed re-use of the data not specified in the protocols should be subject to EC review and approval, as well as approval from the provider
Intellectual property rights must be specified
If the HBM and data are shared only for research purposes, such HBM and data cannot be used for commercialization
The researchers involved in HBM and data sharing must ensure that proper updated records are kept
Where data alone is shared, a Data Transfer Agreement (DTA) or Data Sharing Agreement (DSA) is necessary
General Import/Export Requirements for HBM

The NHABloodCells states that each HBM to be imported into South Africa must be accompanied by a certificate from the supplier stating that the substance has been exported in terms of the originating country’s applicable laws and regulations.

As per the NHABloodCells and ZAF-7, export permits for HBM may only be issued by the Director-General to a Southern African Development Community (SADC) member state or to a South African citizen, provided that the country’s market requirements have been met. An applicant must also be registered with the Health Professions Council of South Africa (HPCSA) and operating in South Africa in order to apply for a permit to import or export HBM. The applicant must also provide the Director-General with written information on stock levels for this substance along with the export application.

Applicants to whom a permit has been issued must keep a record of the import or export and submit this information using the register forms listed in Annexures 4, 5, and 6 of the NHABloodCells. The forms must be submitted to the Director-General annually before the end of February, for the preceding calendar year.

Import/Export Requirements for Specific HBM Categories

The NHABloodCells provides details on unique application requirements for specific types of HBM as outlined below:

Import of tissues being used for therapeutic purposes: application must be accompanied by donor health status
Export of tissues or gametes: application must include written proof that the donated HBM complies with the NHA requirements
Import or export of placenta tissue, embryonic or fetal tissue, embryonic, fetal or umbilical stem cells: applications will only be approved with the Minister’s written consent
Import or export of blood or blood products: applications must be accompanied by a national blood transfusion service certificate and test results. If no documentation is included, the applicant must submit a letter to the Director-General explaining the reason. The Director-General will decide whether tests must be conducted, and the Minister is authorized to determine whether the applicant’s institution can be exempted from these requirements.
Material Transfer Agreement

Per the MTA-Human, all the providers and recipients of HBM for use in research or clinical trials under the auspices of ECs must use the “Material Transfer Agreement of Human Biological Materials” in MTA-Human. The agreement must be signed by the research institution’s authorized representative and the EC. The EC’s obligations are to:

Review and approve research proposals and protocols that require the transfer of human biological materials
Review and approve the material transfer agreement (MTA) and ensure it adequately safeguards human biological material and ethical requirements
Review and approve all secondary use research if the material is to be transferred
The EC must be the last party to sign the agreement after all the provisions of MTA-Human have been satisfied.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF indicates that the MTA covers the transport of HBM between institutions/organizations within the country and cross-border transfers to provide access by the recipient to that material. The MTA should provide guidance on key issues, such as:

Purpose of the transfer of the HBM
Obligations of the parties
Terms and conditions under which HBM may be used
Whether modifications to the HBM are permissible
Whether third-party transfers may happen
What the benefit-sharing arrangements are
The relevant intellectual property rights
The indemnity arrangements
Research institutions may tailor the content to suit their individual contexts. Although some MTAs may include clauses governing sharing of data, it is advisable, as part of data management, to enter into separate data sharing agreements to regulate sharing of one (1) or more data sets from the custodian/provider to a third party.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: January 17, 2025
In accordance with the NHA, the NHASpecAmend, the NHABiol, and the MTA-Human, prior to removing or withdrawing any human biological material (HBM) from the body of a living person for research purposes, consent must be obtained from that person in writing, before a competent witness. If the person is a minor, the parent/guardian of that person must provide consent. Furthermore, when withdrawing blood, the NHASpecAmend requires written consent from persons older than 16 years. Per the MTA-Human, the sponsor must obtain the completed informed consent form (ICF) from the donors of HBM and data, and submit it with the project protocol to the ethics committee (EC) for approval. Further, the sponsor must submit the ICF for secondary uses of the material to the EC should the need arise. Secondary use is defined as the use of the materials for health research purposes other than the uses determined in the approved protocol.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, collection of HBM specifically for research use requires prospective informed consent, usually from the participant. In exceptional circumstances, where a participant is not able to provide informed consent, proxy consent may be permissible. Different consent models may be used depending on the circumstances. Specific (narrow) consent is the most restrictive and permits use of the HBM for the current research study only and excludes consent to storage of leftover HBM for later use and sharing of data or HBM with other researchers, which means that the HBM (including leftover and waste) must be disposed of at the end of the current study. If further use for additional research is wanted, fresh consent must be obtained before disposal occurs.

G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that tiered (differentiated) consent lets the participant provide consent for the current study and to include consent to a small range of additional options if wanted (e.g., to permit storage of their HBM and associated data for specified future research use, or to permit data sharing, or both, etc.). Broad consent is more flexible than tiered consent but still maintains limitations. It lets the participant provide consent for the current study, and to include consent for storage, and for future research use that is within the scope of the current research. This is permitted even if the precise topic of future research is unclear at present. The nature of possible further usage should be described as fully as possible even if the precise topics are unknown; and the consent document must stipulate that further prior ethics review of any new study is necessary, and that permission may be requested to re-contact the person for fresh consent if the future use is outside the scope of the current consent. Certain persons are specially protected: HBM may not be taken from mentally ill or incapacitated persons; HBM that are not naturally replaceable may not be taken from a minor; no gametes may be taken from a minor; and no fetal HBM, except for umbilical cord progenitor cells, may be collected. These restrictions are absolute, which means that research with the categories of person mentioned requires Ministerial permission. Researchers must provide ECs with appropriate evidence that the necessary permission has been obtained.

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that the research participant has a right to withdraw consent; however, this right is limited with anonymized HBM and data.

The NHABiol specifically states that when taking HBM samples from a child, where the person is younger than 18 years, Part 3, Section 129 of the ChildrensAct must be followed.

Additionally, the NHABiol requires the following consent for the removal or withdrawal of HBM samples to treat a person with mental illness:

The mentally ill person’s consent, if capable;
A court appointed curator, spouse, next of kin, parent or guardian, major child, brother, or sister, partner or associate, if the mentally ill person is incapable of giving consent; and
The head of the health institution in the case of an emergency
Similarly, the NHA and the NHABiol include consent provisions for the donation of human bodies and the tissue of deceased persons. These documents state that any person who is competent to make a will may donate their body or any specified tissue to be used after death for medical and dental purposes, as long as the person signs the will in the presence of at least two (2) competent witnesses. The person may also give consent to a post-mortem examination of their body for research purposes, and may select an institution or person as the recipient. In the absence of a donation as described above, the individual’s spouse, child over 18 years, parent, guardian, or brother/sister over 18 years may donate the person’s body or any specific tissue to an institution or person for research purposes. Please refer to the NHA and the NHABiol for detailed requirements. (See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent).

The SA-GCPs observe that many HBM samples are collected during clinical interventions for diagnostic purposes, which means the potential for future use of these samples may be presented. Use of human biological materials and their associated data facilitates research in new technologies, which include genetic and genomic research, and cell and gene therapy (CGT). Sponsors and researchers should, therefore, follow the fundamental ethical principles that underpin all research involving human biological materials and their associated data. Research proposals must address specifically the social value of the research especially in the local context; how consent, privacy, confidentiality will be managed; and the potential effect on families, communities, and other groups. Specific concerns include protection of privacy and whether and how incidental findings are to be communicated to the person from whom the sample originates.

In addition, per the NHATissue, tissue banks are required to develop donor record management systems in which the tissue donor register contains the full identity and relationship of the consenting person. The system will also document tissue banking processes, including the process of obtaining informed written consent.

See the G-EthicsHR-ZAF for additional details on HBM consent, including for databases, storage, and access.

Human Stem Cell Consent Requirements

The NHAStemCell similarly states that authorized stem cell banks must retain a record of the donor’s written informed consent. Further, no person shall use stem cells or its therapeutic research products for educational purposes unless authorized by the National Department of Health (NDOH) and is compliant with the following requirements:

Has obtained the donor’s informed written consent even in the case of residual tissue, blood, or blood products
Is certain the donor has donated voluntarily, and it is properly documented
The NHA also indicates that the NDOH Minister may permit research on stem cells and zygotes that are not more than 14 days old on a written application, and if the applicant documents the research for record purposes, and prior consent is obtained from the donor.

Human Genetic and Genome Research Consent Requirements

The G-EthicsHR-ZAF states that the investigator or institution must obtain consent for human genetic research. Researchers must provide detailed information in the protocol for the EC’s ethics review. When assessing the ethical implications of proposed genetic research, ECs must pay attention to multiple considerations, including the anticipated social value of the research, consent, privacy, confidentiality, as well as the potential effect of the research findings on families, communities, and other social groupings. Because of the types of information that genetic research may reveal, including the range of consequences of this information for participants and their relatives, ECs should consider developing a plan to manage this kind of information. Often, follow-up clinical testing or counselling may be recommended. The proposed plan to manage the information gathered from genetic research should indicate the clinical relevance of the study findings, the implications of the study findings for both participants and those involved in the study, as well as whether and how these findings will be disseminated. This plan must be explained to potential participants.

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, regarding genetic and genome research, specific elements should be incorporated into the separate consent process in addition to the usual information for appropriate informed consent for research participation. Common features of genetic and genomic research that must be explained include what genetic or genomic research means, that indefinite storage and future use and sharing of HBM and derived data is requested, that there are ongoing privacy vulnerabilities for participants as well as for third parties, and that there may be social harms. See the G-EthicsHR-ZAF for detailed requirements.

Waiver of Consent

Per the G-EthicsHR-ZAF, a waiver of consent might be granted for research using archived HBM in circumstances where the HBM is anonymous and the HBM data will also be anonymous and aggregated. However, waivers relating to genetic and genomic research should be approached cautiously, since re-identification of the original source of the HBM may be technically possible despite anonymity of HBM.

Requirements
(Legislation) Children’s Act 38 of 2005 (ChildrensAct) (Effective April 1, 2010)
Parliament
(Legislation) Medicines and Related Substances Act (Act No. 101 of 1965) (MRSA) (Amended 2015)
Parliament
(Legislation) National Health Act, 2003 (Act No. 61 of 2003): Regulations Relating to Research with Human Participants (No.R.719) (NHAParticipants) (September 19, 2014)
Parliament
(Legislation) National Health Act, 2003 (Act No. 61 of 2003): Regulations Relating to the Registration of Microbiological Laboratories and the Acquisition, Importation, Handling, Maintenance and Supply of Human Pathogens (No.R.178) (NHARegMicroLabs) (March 2, 2012)
Parliament
(Legislation) National Health Act, 2003 (Act No. 61 of 2003) (NHA) (Amended 2023)
Parliament
(Legislation) Promotion of Access to Information Act (Act No. 2 of 2000) (POAIA) (Amended 2019)
Parliament
(Legislation) Protection of Personal Information Act, 2013 (Act No. 4 of 2013) (POPIA) (Effective July 1, 2020)
Parliament
(Regulation) Amendment of the Regulations Relating to the Protection of Personal Information, 2018 (POPIA-Regs) (Effective April 17, 2025 per Government Notice 6126 of 2025)
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
(Regulation) Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act No. 101 of 1965): General Regulations (No. 859) (GRMRSA) (August 25, 2017)
National Department of Health
(Regulation) National Health Act, 2003 (Act No. 61 of 2003): Material Transfer Agreement of Human Biological Materials (MTA-Human) (July 20, 2018)
National Department of Health
(Regulation) National Health Act, 2003 (Act No. 61 of 2003): Regulations Regarding the General Control of Human Bodies, Tissue, Blood Products, and Gametes: Amendment (NHASpecAmend) (April 26, 2017)
National Department of Health
(Regulation) National Health Act, 2003 (Act No. 61 of 2003): Regulations Relating to Stem Cell Banks (No. R.183) (NHAStemCell) (March 2, 2012)
National Department of Health
(Regulation) National Health Act, 2003 (Act No. 61 of 2003): Regulations Relating to the Import and Export of Human Tissue, Blood, Blood Products, Cultured Cells, Stem Cells, Embryos, Foetal Tissue, Zygotes and Gametes (No.R.181) (NHABloodCells) (March 2, 2012)
National Department of Health
(Regulation) National Health Act, 2003 (Act No. 61 of 2003): Regulations Relating to the Use of Human Biological Material (No.R.177) (NHABiol) (March 2, 2012)
Parliament
(Regulation) National Health Act, 2003 (Act No. 61 of 2003): Regulations Relating to Tissue Banks (No. R.182) (NHATissue) (March 2, 2012)
National Department of Health
(Regulation) Regulations Regarding Fees Payable in Terms of the Provisions of the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965 (MRSA-Fees) (Effective February 13, 2025)
National Department of Health
(Guidance) Clinical Guideline (G-Clin) (Version 3) (August 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Emergency Procedures for Clinical Trial Sites (G-EmergencyProc) (Version 3) (August 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) General Information Guideline (G-GenInfo) (Version 12) (December 2023)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Good Pharmacy Practice in South Africa (SA-GPPs) (2018)
South African Pharmacy Council
(Guidance) Guideline for Capacity Building and Transformation in Clinical Research in South Africa (G-Capacity) (Version 2) (October 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guideline for Clinical Trial Investigators (G-CTInvestigators) (Version 3) (Effective October 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guideline for Clinical Trial Participant Time, Inconvenience & Expense (TIE) Compensation Model (G-TIECompensation) (Version 2) (Effective August 1, 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guideline for Electronic Submission of Clinical Trial Documents (Amendments, Bioequivalence Studies, Responses, Notifications, and Serious Adverse Events) (G-CTA-Electronic) (Version 3) (September 5, 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guideline for Post Clinical Trial Access (PTA)/Continued Access (G-PostCTAccess) (Version 4) (August 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guideline for Release of Import Health Products at Ports of Entry (G-ImprtPorts) (Version 2) (June 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guideline for Safety Reporting During Clinical Trials in South Africa (G-SafetyRpt) (Version 5) (October 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guideline for the Procedure of Consultation Meetings with Clinical Trial Applicants (G-ConsultMtg) (Version 2) (August 3, 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guideline on Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicines (SA-GMPs) (Version 8) (September 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guideline on How to Apply for a License to Manufacture, Import, and/or Export Medicines and Scheduled Substances (G-ManuImpExp) (Version 3) (June 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines for Good Practice in the Health Care Professions: General Ethical Guidelines for Health Researchers, Booklet 13 (G-GPHlthCare) (September 2016)
Health Professions Council of South Africa
(Guidance) Guidelines for Good Practice in the Health Care Professions: Seeking Patients’ Informed Consent: The Ethical Considerations, Booklet 4 (G-GPHlthCare-IC) (September 2016)
Health Professions Council of South Africa
(Guidance) Liability Insurance for Clinical Trials (G-Insurance) (Version 3) (August 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) Ministerial Consent for Non-therapeutic Health Research with Minors: Operational Guidelines (G-MinisterConsent) (2015)
National Health Research Ethics Council, National Department of Health
(Guidance) Oversight and Monitoring in Clinical Trials (G-Monitor) (Version 4) (August 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) PIC/S Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products, PE009-17 (PIC-S-GMP-Guide) (August 25, 2023)
The Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme
(Guidance) SAHPRA Payment Guideline (G-SAHPRAFees) (Version 9) (February 2025)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Guidance) South African Ethics in Health Research Guidelines: Principles, Processes and Structures (G-EthicsHR-ZAF) (3rd Edition) (2024)
National Department of Health
(Guidance) South African Good Clinical Practice: Clinical Trial Guidelines (SA-GCPs) (3rd edition) (2020)
National Department of Health
(Communication) Clinical Trial Applications – Investigational Product Import License (CTA-Import) (September 18, 2024)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Communication) Newly Gazetted Regulation Regarding Fees Payable in Terms of the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965 (Act No. 101 of 1965) (Fees-Info) (February 12, 2025)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Communication) South African Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Training Post Covid-19 Pandemic (GCP-Trning) (April 22, 2024)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
Additional Resources
(Document) 2020/21 - 2024/25 Strategic Plan (ZAF-9) (January 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Document) ASSAf POPIA Compliance Framework for Researchers and Research Institutions (ZAF-4) (May 2025)
Academy of Science of South Africa
(Document) Biological Substances Export/Import Permits (ZAF-7) (Date Unavailable)
TNT and South African Clinical Research Association (SACRA)
(Document) Clinical Trial Compensation Guidelines (ZAF-26) (2014)
Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry, United Kingdom
(Document) Clinical Trials Committee Meeting and Submission Dates for 2026 (ZAF-11) (November 7, 2025)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Document) Human Research Ethics Committees (HRECs) Registered with the South African National Health Research Ethics Council (NHREC) (ZAF-13) (December 2, 2025)
National Health Research Ethics Council
(Document) Insurance and Compensation in the Event of Injury in Phase I Clinical Trials (ZAF-25) (2nd Edition) (June 2012)
Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry, BioIndustry Association, and Clinical Contract Research Association, United Kingdom
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (ZAF-8) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (ZAF-44) (October 22, 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Good Clinical Laboratory Practice (GCLP) (ZAF-2) (2009)
World Health Organization
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZAF-27) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) Clinical Trials (ZAF-36) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) Country Profile: South Africa (ZAF-34) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) eServices: Information Regulator - User Login (ZAF-14) (Current as of October 16, 2025)
South Africa Information Regulator
(Webpage) eServices: Information Regulator – Information Officers (ZAF-28) (Current as of October 16, 2025)
South Africa Information Regulator
(Webpage) FAQs – Clinical Trials (ZAF-1) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) Fees (ZAF-37) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) National Health Research Ethics Council (ZAF-52) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
Department of Health
(Webpage) Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (ZAF-50) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
Pan African Clinical Trials Registry
(Webpage) Registration (ZAF-12) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
National Health Research Ethics Council
(Webpage) Research Ethics Office (ZAF-49) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
South African Medical Research Council
(Webpage) South African Health Products Regulatory Authority - About Us (ZAF-39) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) South African Health Products Regulatory Authority - Key Contacts (ZAF-47) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) South African Health Products Regulatory Authority - Our Offices (ZAF-35) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) South African National Clinical Trial Register - How to Register a Trial (ZAF-32) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
National Department of Health
(Webpage) The SAHPRA Board (ZAF-38) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Webpage) The South African National Clinical Trials Register (ZAF-48) (Current as of January 17, 2025)
South African National Clinical Trials Register
Forms
(Form) Application to Conduct a Clinical Trial - Guidance in Conditions of a Public Health Emergency (G-CTAPHEmerg) (Version 2) (Effective June 1, 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Form) Annual Report Form for Human Research Ethics Committees Registered with the National Health Research Ethics Council (ZAF-54) (Version 4.03) (November 5, 2025)
National Health Research Ethics Council
(Form) Application for a Protocol Amendment to an Approved Trial (ZAF-20) (Version 4) (Effective September 5, 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Form) Application for Additional Investigator(s) or Change of Investigator(s) and Application for Additional Sites (ZAF-21) (Version 4) (Effective September 5, 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Form) Application Form to Register a Human Research Ethics Committee with the National Health Research Ethics Council (ZAF-53) (Version 4.03) (November 5, 2025)
National Health Research Ethics Council
(Form) Application to Conduct a Clinical Trial (ZAF-23) (Version 8) (Effective September 18, 2023)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Form) Application to the Human Research Ethics Committee: (Medical) (ZAF-45) (Version 4) (2025)
Human Research Ethics Committee, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg
(Form) CIOMS Form I (ZAF-15) (Date Unavailable)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(Form) License Application to Manufacture, Import, or Export (HCR) Medicines and Scheduled Substances Including Contract Testing Laboratories (ZAF-55) (Effective August 26, 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Form) Notification Studies: Phase IV (ZAF-17) (Version 5) (Effective October 1, 2023)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Form) Research Ethics Committee Application Form (ZAF-22) (Version 5) (December 6, 2024)
Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC), South Africa
(Form) Safety Reporting During Clinical Trials Form (ZAF-19) (Version 4) (Effective October 26, 2022)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
(Form) Six Monthly Progress Report Form for Clinical Trials (ZAF-18) (Version 5) (Effective September 22, 2023)
South African Health Products Regulatory Authority
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 


Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Tanzania
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
English
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
Yes
Clinical trial registration required
Yes
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
No
Age of minors
Under 18
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Clinical research in Tanzania is regulated and overseen by the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) and the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH).

Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority

As per the TMMDAct and TZA-4, the TMDA is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial approvals, oversight, and inspections in Tanzania. (Note: while the TMMDAct is formatted as a “Revised Draft,” it incorporates the final changes from 2019 that are codified in the FinanceAct.) The TMDA grants permission for clinical trials to be conducted in the country in accordance with the TMMDAct and the CT-Regs.

Per TZA-29, the TMDA is an executive agency under the Ministry of Health (MoH). The TMDA is responsible for regulating the safety, quality, and effectiveness of medicines, medical devices, and diagnostics.

Per the TMMDAct, the agency has a Ministerial Advisory Board (MAB), which consists of:

The MoH Permanent Secretary who serves as Chairman
Up to 12 Minister-appointed members
The Director General who serves as Secretary to the board
In accordance with TZA-29, TMDA is responsible for the following regulatory processes:

Regulating the manufacture, importation, distribution, and sale of medicines, medical devices, and diagnostics
Prescribing standards of quality, safety, and effectiveness for medicines, medical devices, and diagnostics
Inspecting manufacturing industries and business premises dealing with regulated products and ensuring the standards required are attained
Evaluating and registering medicines, medical devices, and diagnostics so as to reach the required standards before marketing authorization
Issuing business permits for premises dealing with regulated products
Assessing the quality, safety, and efficacy of controlled drugs
Conducting laboratory investigations for regulated products to ascertain their quality specifications
Conducting pharmacovigilance of medical products and vigilance of medical devices and diagnostics circulating on the market
Promoting rational use of medicines, medical devices, and diagnostics
Educating and sharing accurate and reliable information to stakeholders and the general public on regulatory matters
As described in TZA-2, TMDA’s Clinical Trials Control and Pharmacovigilance (CTPV) section is under the Directorate of Human and Veterinary Medicines, and is responsible for the regulation of clinical trials, pharmacovigilance, and post-marketing surveillance. The regulation of clinical trials mainly includes authorization of clinical trials and good clinical practice (GCP) inspection of investigator sites. See the Scope of Assessment section for additional details.

The PV-Regs established the Pharmacovigilance Technical Committee, under the National Pharmacovigilance Centre of TMDA, to provide recommendations to the Director General on pharmacovigilance-related safety issues, including causality assessment of adverse drug reactions and adverse events. In addition, as stated in TZA-37, there is a TMDA Clinical Trials Technical Committee (CTTC), pursuant to the TMMDAct, that provides independent technical advice to the Director General. Members of the CTTC provide technical advice to assure that clinical trials are designed, conducted, analyzed, and reported in accordance with TMDA and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13) guidelines. Members of the CTTC are required to be prudent, transparent, independent, and committed to their professional ethics while discussing all matters pertaining to clinical trials. The CTTC, which meets at least once quarterly, is composed of experts with knowledge and experience in at least the following fields:

Clinical Trials
Medical Research
Clinical Pharmacology
Clinical Epidemiology
Medicine
Dental Surgery
Pharmacy
Medical Statistics
Public Health
Toxicology
Microbiology
Pathology
Regulatory Affairs
Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology

According to TZA-45 and TZA-16, COSTECH is under the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology and is responsible for coordinating and promoting research and technology as the chief advisor to the government. Its principal roles and responsibilities include (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Preparing and reviewing national science, technology, and innovation programs, including dissemination and transfer of technology
Monitoring and coordinating the activities relating to scientific research, technology development, and innovation of all persons or body concerned with such activities
Acquiring, storing, and disseminating scientific and technical information
Registering scientific research institutions operating in Tanzania
Advising the government on matters such as priority areas for scientific research; the allocation and use of research and innovation funds; regional and international cooperation in scientific research, innovation, and technology development and transfer; and matters relating to the training and recruitment of research personnel
Defining national resource priorities and research guidelines
Communicating research results
Providing technical support to institutions related to ethics and monitoring implementation of research and innovative activities
Per the G-ResearchClearance and TZA-47, the COSTECH must review, approve, and issue permits for all research in Tanzania. The G-ResearchClearance specifies that COSTECH, through its National Research Clearance Committee (NRCC), receives and reviews research proposals for their scientific merit, safety, and ethics. Upon approval, NRCC issues research permits. (Note that TZA-47 refers to the NRCC as the National Research Registration Committee.)

Other Considerations

Per TZA-9, Tanzania has adopted several clinical trial related guidelines of the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use including the ICH Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13). See TZA-9 for a listing of the adopted guidelines.

Contact Information

Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority

According to the G-AppConductCT and TZA-26, TMDA’s contact information is as follows:

Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
P.O. Box 1253, Dodoma or P.O. Box 77150
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania

Telephone: +255 22 262961989 / 262961990
Fax: +255 22 2450793
Email: info@tmda.go.tz

Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology

According to TZA-46 and TZA-47, COSTECH’s contact information is as follows (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology
Ali Hassan Mwinyi Road, Kijitonyama (Sayansi) COSTECH Building
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania

Telephone: +255 22 2700749

Email: info@costech.or.tz or dg@costech.or.tz
Research Clearance Email: rclearance@costech.or.tz

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Overview

As indicated in the TMMDAct and the CT-Regs, the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) is responsible for reviewing, evaluating, and approving clinical trial applications in Tanzania. The scope of the TMDA’s assessment includes all clinical trials (Phases I-IV). As delineated in the TMMDAct, the CT-Regs, and the G-AppConductCT, the TMDA’s approval of a clinical trial application is dependent upon obtaining proof of national ethics committee (EC) approval from the National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC). According to the G-AppConductCT and TZA-4, the TMDA and national EC reviews may be conducted in parallel. However, the TMDA application must include a copy of the national EC's acknowledgement of receipt for the study protocol. In addition, the TMDA's approval will only be finalized once national EC approval is obtained.

As described in TZA-2, TMDA’s Clinical Trials Control and Pharmacovigilance (CTPV) section is responsible for the regulation of clinical trials, pharmacovigilance, and post-marketing surveillance. Its functions include the following:

Review and assess applications to conduct clinical trials in Tanzania, including evaluating clinical trial protocols, including preclinical studies, clinical data, and quality of investigational products (IPs)
Approve clinical trial applications with minimum requirements
Inspect clinical trial sites to ensure compliance with good clinical practices (GCPs), good clinical laboratory practices (GCLPs), clinical trials regulations, guidelines, standard operating procedures (SOPs), and internationally accepted standards
Update and maintain the Tanzania Clinical Trials Registry, which is accessed via the Regulatory Information Management System (RIMS) Customer Self Service Portal (TZA-34)
Review and evaluate all safety information (adverse events) from clinical trials
Review and evaluate progress reports of all approved clinical trials
Serve as Secretariat to Tanzania’s Clinical Trials Technical Committee
Monitor and respond to all inquiries regarding conduct of clinical trials in Tanzania
Per the G-ResearchClearance, the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH) must review and approve all research in Tanzania to:

Ensure research conduct complies with national laws and regulations
Document and register research
Secure research results and promote its use in policy and practice
Safeguard the dignity, rights, safety, and well-being of research participants
Reduce systemic risks imposed through the research
Provide research permits
Clinical Trial Review Process

Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority

As set forth in the TMMDAct, the CT-Regs, and G-AppConductCT, the TMDA coordinates the clinical trial application process. Upon receipt of a clinical trial application, the TMDA initially screens the application for completeness. If complete, the TMDA officer acknowledges receipt of the application by returning a signed copy of the cover sheet to the applicant (see Annex 1 of the G-AppConductCT). The TMMDAct states that the TMDA Director General must issue a Clinical Trial Certificate to authorize the trial to be conducted. (See the Submission Content section for submission requirements.) TZA-4 indicates that the TMDA may request a clarification or additional documents through the online submission system (TZA-34). The assessment will resume once the applicant has provided clarification and responded to the queries.

Per the G-AppConductCT, the TMDA reviews clinical trial applications and amendments to assess the quality of the products and determine that the use of the IP for the purposes of the clinical trial does not endanger the health of participants or other persons, the clinical trial is not contrary to the best interests of a participant, and the objectives of the clinical trial may be achieved. Evaluation of applications is conducted on a first-in, first-out basis unless the IP meets the fast-track criteria. The application assessment must involve the TMDA and external evaluators. If the TMDA requests additional information from the applicant, the evaluation process will stop until the TMDA receives a written response to the query. The response should be submitted within six (6) months after being issued with a query letter. All queries issued in the same letter must be submitted together in one (1) transaction. Non-compliance to these requirements in content and format will lead to rejection of the clinical trial. Evaluation of applications will be completed within 60 working days of receiving the application. A new clinical trial application may be fast tracked and assessed within 30 working days of its submission if the applicant has requested this and paid twice the prescribed clinical trials application fees. If authorization is not granted, an appeal may be submitted to the TMDA within 60 days of the TMDA’s decision. If no appeal is submitted by the applicant within this period or, if after consideration of any comments submitted, the TMDA is still not satisfied, it must reject the application. In an appeal, the applicant must give grounds for review for each reason given for the rejection of a clinical trial. The grounds for the appeal request must be based on the information that was submitted in the application. Any additional or new information that was not earlier submitted will only be considered upon submission of a new application. The TMDA may review, reject, or vary its own decision.

Per the G-AppConductCT, the clinical trials certification will be valid up to the proposed duration of the study indicated in the application. However, the validity will not extend beyond five (5) years. If the trial will last more than five (5) years, the applicant must request an extension. Further, the TMDA must approve amendments to a previously authorized protocol for changes that affect participant selection and monitoring; changes that affect clinical efficacy and safety requirements; changes that affect participant discontinuation; addition/deletion of an investigational site(s); changes that result in the extension of trial duration; and/or changes that relate to the chemistry and manufacturing information that may affect drug safety and quality. An application for amendment(s) must be accompanied by clearance or authorization from NatHREC.

The G-AppConductCT indicates that the TMDA must not authorize a clinical trial where it finds that:

The information and documents as set out in the guidelines have not been provided
The application contains false or misleading information
The information provided is insufficient to enable the TMDA to assess the safety and risks of the IP or clinical trial
Queries raised by the TMDA in relation to the application were not adequately responded to
The applicant has not submitted an ethical clearance from any approved medical research institute
The use of the IP for the purposes of the clinical trial endangers the health of a clinical trial participant or any other person
The objectives of the clinical trial will not be achieved
It is not in the public interest to authorize the clinical trial
Any other reasonable grounds as may be determined by the TMDA
Next, the G-AppConductCT states that following the TMDA’s authorization of a new clinical trial or amendment, information regarding refusals by other regulatory authorities or ECs should be submitted as a notification. Further, the TMDA may suspend, terminate, or withdraw authorization of a clinical trial if it finds that the conditions of authorization of a trial have been violated; or there is information raising doubts about the safety or scientific validity of the trial or the conduct of the trial at a particular trial site. For additional information, see TZA-4.

(See the Submission Process section for additional details on the clinical trial application and amendments submissions.)

Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology

As for COSTECH review, the G-ResearchClearance indicates that once COSTECH receives a new application, the Secretariat screens the application for completeness; registers the application; sends an acknowledgement to the applicant; submits the application for the appropriate expert, local, and National Research Clearance Committee (NRCC) review; records NRCC’s final decision; and informs the applicant of the decision. COSTECH’s NRCC must reach a decision through a consensus of members forming a quorum at their meeting. The decision may be approval without amendments, approval subject to minor or major amendments, a denial, or a postponement pending further information. If approved, researchers should collect their permit within 90 days after the decision is communicated, and failure to do so requires a new application.

Per the G-ResearchClearance, permits are valid for one (1) year, and can be renewed, provided that COSTECH receives satisfactory progress reports for the previous periods. COSTECH must review the research to ensure compliance with the approved permit and see if any material changes have occurred in the research or if there are findings that may cause termination. The principal investigator (PI) must write to COSTECH two (2) months before the expiration date to request a renewal of the permit. For renewals, COSTECH will submit the registered application to an internal reviewer for evaluation, and otherwise, follow the same review and notification procedures as outlined above for a new permit. Regarding applications for amendments, if there is a change in PI, the affiliate institution must notify COSTECH within one (1) month of the departure of the outgoing PI in writing with an accompanying progress report. If a new researcher joins an ongoing project, the PI must submit a request for a research permit for the new member to COSTECH at least two (2) months prior to joining the team, accompanied with a detailed CV and rationale. Changes to the study site, objectives, and methodologies for an ongoing research project must be submitted in writing to COSTECH at least two (2) months prior to implementing the change.

See TZA-47 for additional information about national research registration.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority

As per the G-AppConductCT and the TMMDAFees, applicants are responsible for paying a processing fee to submit a clinical trial application. The TMMDAFees indicates that the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) levies the following processing fees:

$3,000 USD for submitting a clinical trial application
Double the cost of registration and analysis fee for fast-track clinical trial applications
$500 USD for amendments for major changes in clinical trials
$300 USD for amendments for minor changes in clinical trials
See the TMMDAFees for a complete list of TMDA fees and charges.

Payment Instructions

The G-AppConductCT states that the fee must be paid to the order of the TMDA directly to the bank by draft electronic transfer through the following accounts:

Foreign applicants: Account Numbers 100380013 Citibank (T) and 02J1021399100 CRDB
Local applicants: Account Number 2041100069 NMB

Applicants are responsible for all bank charges when payment is made by bank transfer. In addition, applicants must include a note with payment details, including the applicant’s name, the product(s) paid for, and the amount of fees paid.

TZA-4 indicates that the banks accounts are linked to Government Electronic Payment Gateway (GEPG) payments as follows:

Name: GEPG TMDA Collection Account (USD), Bank: NMB Revenue Bank, Account No: 20810015291, Branch University
Name: GEPG TMDA Collection Account (USD), Bank: NBC USD, Account No: 040105002468, Branch: UDSM
Name: GEPG TMDA Collection Account (USD), Bank: CRDB Bank US, Account No: 0250021399100, Branch: Holland House
The Pay-Overseas reiterates that overseas customers must make all payments via GEPG. Before making any payment, TMDA customers should receive the special payment identification number (Control Number) indicated on a Proforma Invoice issued by the TMDA as per the TMMDAFees. The TMDA’s external customers who pay for services from abroad must fill the relevant payment form (swift form), especially item/section No. 70 by ensuring that no other information is entered in this section except the payment identification number (Control Number). However, the payer should select “OUR” in the charge mode section 71A. Any payment made without a Control Number will not be reflected in any invoice. Further, payments of more than one (1) Control Number(s) cannot be combined. Note that deposited money in the TMDA’s account cannot be refunded.

Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology

As delineated in the G-ResearchClearance, the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH) charges an application fee of $50 USD to review and register a research proposal. The principal investigator (PI) should pay the nonrefundable research application fee, which is paid per project. Before the permit is issued, COSTECH requires foreign researchers to pay a research permit fee of $300 USD.

Payment Instructions

Per the G-ResearchClearance and TZA-47, foreign researchers can pay the research permit fee via the following bank account:

Account name or beneficiary: Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology
Bank Name: National Bank of Commerce Ltd
Branch: Samora Avenue, P.O. Box 9002, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania
Account Number: 012105018998
Account Currency: US Dollars
Swift Number/Code: NLCBTZTX

According TZA-47, in-country applicants can pay the fee with a control number (payment bill), which will be used for a deposit. A control number for payment can be obtained through an email request to COSTECH at rclearance@costech.or.tz.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Overview

As indicated in the G-AppConductCT, all clinical trials require national ethics committee (EC) approval for each trial site. Per the G-TMRCC and TZA-50, the national EC in Tanzania is the National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC), which focuses on the ethical issues surrounding submitted research proposals. As delineated in the G-TMRCC, NatHREC-Charter, TZA-5, and TZA-18, NatHREC is a subcommittee of the Medical Research Coordination Committee (MRCC), which serves as the national health research coordinating body, and is responsible for supervising, controlling, coordinating, evaluating, and promoting health research in Tanzania or elsewhere on behalf of or for the benefit of Tanzania. The MRCC, which is part of the National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR), delegates the registration, review, approval, and monitoring of clinical research to the NatHREC.

As delineated in NatHREC-Charter, NatHREC provides ethical review and clearance of health research protocols and monitors and evaluates research studies. In addition, NatHREC conducts the following activities:

Receiving and registering all health research carried out in Tanzania
Ensuring that all health research protocols are thoroughly reviewed to safeguard the dignity, rights, safety, and well-being of research participants
Advising researchers on the risks and responsibilities of conducting research
Recommending to the MRCC for ethics clearance approval, all health research protocols that have complied with the country’s ethics regulations and guidelines
Monitoring and coordinating all approved health research conducted in Tanzania
Advocating for and overseeing all issues pertaining to health research data and material sharing and/or transfer
Supporting health research institutions in Tanzania to establish institutional ECs or Institutional Review Boards (IRBs)
Accrediting health research institutions’ ECs
Per the G-AppConductCT, G-EthicsHR-TZA, the G-ResearchIntegrity, the G-RevPrtcl, TZA-18, TZA-5, and TZA-1, all health research involving foreign collaborators must get ethics approval from both the institutional EC and NatHREC. In addition, TZA-5 specifies that the following also require review by both NatHREC and the zonal or institutional EC: all clinical trials; research dealing with vulnerable, special, or marginalized groups; and sensitive topics or indigenous communities. Protocols that do not involve foreign collaborators and non-clinical trials of investigational products (IP) can be reviewed and given ethics clearance at the zonal or institutional level. NatHREC may request zonal or institutional EC reviewers to assist in review or joint review of protocols when needed. The NatHREC-Charter indicates that institutional and zonal ECs complement NatHREC’s function of issuing institutional ethics clearance certificates and monitoring the approved research at their institutions. TZA-18 states that if there is no institutional EC available, the approval must be obtained from NatHREC.

The G-EthicsHR-TZA further states that institutional ECs should monitor their hosted research activities to ensure compliance. Institutional ECs may function at the institutional, zonal, or national levels. ECs act as independent reviewers of any proposed study on human research participants, to ensure ethical conduct of research, and that participant’s rights and welfare are not violated. The major responsibility of ECs is to safeguard the rights, safety, and well-being of research participants. See the Oversight of Ethics Committees section for information on the registration and accreditation of ECs by NatHREC.

Ethics Committee Composition

National Health Research Ethics Committee

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA and TZA-5, the Director General of NIMR is responsible for appointing NatHREC members. Members are selected based on their capacity, interest, ethical and scientific knowledge, and expertise, as well as their commitment and willingness to volunteer the necessary time and effort for the NatHREC’s work. NatHREC must consist of not less than nine (9) and up to 15 members with the relevant qualifications and experience to review and evaluate the science, medical, and ethical aspects of health research protocols. In addition, NatHREC must be composed of members with varying backgrounds to promote a complete and adequate review of health research protocols commonly received by the NatHREC. Per TZA-5, committee members must include medical scientists, biomedical scientists, social scientists, legal representatives, unaffiliated community representatives, representatives of religious or faith-based organizations, a representative from the President’s Office-Regional Administration and Local Government (PO-RALG), and a representative from the Tanzania Ministry of Health. The Director General may appoint additional members depending on the need for expertise and/or representation and not exceeding the maximum number of members. Regarding leadership, the NatHREC Chairperson must be elected from among appointed members but must not be an employee of NIMR. The NatHREC Secretary, however, must always be an employee of NIMR. See TZA-5 for additional information on NatHREC’s standard operating procedures (SOPs).

Per the G-TMRCC, the NatHREC is represented by the following organizations:

NIMR
Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH)
Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences (MUHAS)) (formerly known as Muhimbili University College of Health Science (MUCHS))
Christian Social Services Commission (CSSC)
The National Muslim Council of Tanzania (BAKWATA)
Economic and Social Research Foundation (ESRF)
Tanzania Gender Networking Programme (TGNP)
Legal and Human Rights Centre (LHRC)
University of Dar es Salaam (UDSM)
Ministry of Health (MoH)
Ministry of Education (MoE)
Institutional Ethics Committees

As per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, institutional ECs must have members capable of providing a competent and thorough review of research protocols. Membership typically includes physicians, scientists, laboratory experts, nurses, lawyers, ethicists, and other professionals. In addition, the above membership also includes community members or representatives of patients’ groups who can represent the cultural and moral values of study participants. When a proposed study involves vulnerable individuals or groups, as may be the case in research involving prisoners or illiterate persons, representatives of relevant advocacy groups should be invited to meetings where such protocols will be reviewed. Regular rotation of members is desirable for balancing the advantage of experience with that of fresh perspectives. In addition, each institutional EC must include at least one (1) member who is not affiliated with the institution and is not part of the immediate family of a person who is affiliated with the institution. Further, an EC may invite individuals with competence in particular areas to assist in the review of issues, which require expertise beyond, or in addition to that available in the EC; these individuals do not vote with the EC.

Per IERC-Accredit, following are the membership requirements for ECs accredited with NIMR:

The Chairperson must have adequate experience in health research, leadership, and have basic knowledge of bioethics
An EC must comprise at least five (5) members or more, and the total must be an odd number
At least one-third of the members of the EC must be of either gender
At least one (1) member should come from outside the institution
At least two (2) members should have research expertise and experience, and one (1) of these should be in the health field
At least one (1) member should represent a lay group
For ECs reviewing clinical research, the committee should have representation from medicine, laboratory, pharmacy, and nursing as needed; a clinician who is active in clinical practice (with a valid practicing license) or in clinical research is mandatory
At least one (1) member of the EC should possess knowledge and understanding of Tanzanian law
Where an EC has been formed to serve more than one (1) institution, the institution hosting the Secretariat is responsible for the functioning of the EC in all aspects
Where multiple institutions are involved in one (1) EC, the appointing authority must make appointments in consultation with the relevant heads of the respective institutions
The G-ResearchIntegrity recommends that composition should not only be multi-disciplinary and multi-sector but should also balance scientific expertise, age, and gender distribution, and should have a non-technical member representing community interests. The institution should determine the type of members needed and establish procedures for selecting/appointing members and number of persons. It is recommended that ECs have seven (7) to 15 members. See the G-ResearchIntegrity and TZA-23 for additional recommendations.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

National Health Research Ethics Committee

The G-TMRCC and TZA-5 state that the NatHREC must operate within written SOPs, including a process to be followed for conducting reviews. The G-TMRCC states that the SOPs should include information on NatHREC composition, meeting schedules, frequency of reviews, requirements for initial and ongoing evaluation of the research study, and requirements for notifying the investigator and the institution of results related to the study’s initial and ongoing evaluation. Committee members should agree to disclose their names, occupations, and affiliations, and to sign the confidentiality and conflict of interest agreements. Per TZA-5, the SOPs facilitate and support ethical review by improving the standard and uniformity of decision-making and assuring and gaining the confidence of the public in the NatHREC. Membership must be for three (3) years, renewable once, under the discretion of the MRCC Chairperson. A member of the NatHREC may resign by submitting an official letter of resignation to the MRCC Chairperson. A member of the NatHREC may also be disqualified from membership should the appointing authority provide adequate written reasons to the NatHREC and there is unanimous agreement. The NatHREC must request a replacement of any member when there is protracted illness that prevents the member from participating; persistent absenteeism or missing three (3) consecutive committee meetings; voluntary withdrawal or resignation; and/or ethical misconduct.

According to TZA-5, the NatHREC Secretary oversees the daily operations of the Secretariat and arranges training and educational programs to new and continuing committee members and the scientific community on health research ethics. The training must include programs about the basic principles of human participant protection, current literature, and regulations and guidelines affecting the committee and NIMR. Further, the Secretary assists in recruiting new committee members, as well as preparing and submitting an annual committee operational budget and plan to NIMR in consultation with the Chair. See TZA-5 for details on the functions of the NatHREC Secretariat.

Per TZA-5, NatHREC members must fulfill the following responsibilities:

Review, discuss, and consider health research protocols submitted for ethical clearance evaluation
Review research study progress reports and monitor on-going studies as appropriate
Review reports on adverse events, serious adverse events, and/or suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions, as well as any other safety reports and recommend appropriate actions
Maintain professional confidentiality of documents and deliberations of the committee review proceedings and meetings
Declare conflicts of interest when they exist
Participate in continuing education activities in biomedical ethics and research
Undertake committee duties assigned to them by the NatHREC Chairperson
Attend NatHREC meetings regularly and participate actively during deliberations
Participate in the review of NatHREC SOPs
Conduct research site monitoring visits as deemed necessary
According to TZA-5, the NatHREC must convene at least once a month with a quorum of at least half the number of committee members. The NatHREC Secretary, with support from the Secretariat, must prepare an annual almanac of meetings. The meeting package must include the agenda; all research protocols; and all related materials including, but not limited to, copies of the protocols, informed consent materials, continuing and final reviews, and safety reports. The Secretariat must keep a record of attendance as well as meeting deliberations, indicating which members were present and the discussions of review applications. If members have reviewed a protocol and identified issues that require the principal investigator (PI) to be present during the meeting for further deliberations, then the PI of that research protocol may be invited to answer questions or clarify issues. The meeting members must reach decisions by a consensus; however, if a consensus cannot be achieved, a formal vote must be taken. All members have the right to vote. The committee must provide formal recommendations to the MRCC on the approval of applications, along with minutes that include protocol title and date of review, a checklist of documents reviewed, and a decision reached by the committee, whether approved, approved with stipulation, recommended for resubmission after revision, or not recommended with reasons. For detailed NatHREC procedures and information, see TZA-5.

Institutional Ethics Committees

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the EC members are appointed by institutional appointing authorities. The EC must be constituted according to a document that specifies the manner in which members and the Chair will be appointed, reappointed, and replaced. EC members must regularly update their knowledge about the ethical conduct of health-related research. If committees do not have the relevant expertise to adequately review a specific protocol, they must consult external persons with the required skills or certification. Each EC member must undergo at least one (1) basic training in research ethics within one (1) year of appointment and, thereafter, should undergo continued ethics training at least once every two (2) years. Members of an EC must serve for a term of three (3) years. EC members must guard against any tendencies of unethical conduct on their part. For example, they must protect the confidentiality of research projects, documents, and discussions; an EC member must not appropriate the submitted protocol for their own use; and they must not compel investigators to submit to an unnecessary repetition of review.

In addition, as delineated in the G-EthicsHR-TZA, ECs are responsible for determining whether the research objectives are responsive to the health needs and priorities of the proposed study population, particularly in Tanzania. The ability to judge the ethical acceptability of various aspects of a research protocol requires a thorough understanding of a community’s customs and traditions. For example, the EC should include members that are able to indicate suitable community members to serve as intermediaries between investigators and research participants and to advise on whether material benefits or inducements may be regarded as appropriate considering a community’s gift exchange and other customs and traditions. ECs must have mechanisms to ensure the independence of their operations. They must avoid undue influence and minimize and manage conflicts of interest. ECs must require that their members disclose to the committee any interests that could constitute a conflict of interest or otherwise bias their evaluation of a research protocol. ECs must evaluate each study considering any disclosed interests and ensure appropriate steps are taken to mitigate possible conflicts of interest. ECs may receive a fee for reviewing protocols, and this need not constitute a conflict of interest.

As required in the G-EthicsHR-TZA, ECs should hold meetings as frequently as possible to facilitate timely ethical clearance. ECs must review proposed research at convened meetings where at least 50 percent of the members are present, including at least one (1) member who represents the interests of the community. The Chairperson may be given powers to approve minor matters on behalf of the EC but ensure that the papers are made available to the rest of the EC members at the next meeting. ECs should have the power to co-opt professional or lay members where necessary. For a research protocol to be approved, it must receive the approval of a simple majority of those members present at the meeting; the only exception to the simple majority requirement is in the case of expedited review.

Regarding documentation, per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the institution must ensure that the EC prepares and maintains adequate documentation and retain the records for at least five (5) years after the completion of the study. All records must be accessible for inspection and copying by authorized representatives, including the following:

Detailed written procedures for the EC
Copies of all research protocols reviewed, scientific evaluations that accompany the protocols, approved sample consent documents, progress reports submitted by the investigator(s), reports of injuries to research participants, etc.
Minutes of EC meetings that must be in sufficient detail to show attendance at the meetings; actions taken by the IRB; the vote on these actions, including the number of members voting for, against, and abstaining; the basis for requiring changes in or disapproving research; and a written summary of the discussion of controversial issues and their resolution
Records of continuing review activities
Copies of all correspondence between the EC and investigator(s)
Statements of significant new findings that were provided to research participants
Per the G-ResearchIntegrity, institutions should have clear documentation of candidacy requirements and procedures for identifying or recruiting EC members. The recruitment methods, duration of membership, terms of service, qualifications, disqualifications, resignation procedures, re-appointment/renewal, and other duties and responsibilities should be documented in EC SOPs. Appointment of EC members must be done at the institutional managerial level in consultation with experts, relevant boards, and peer institutions. Institutions should minimize conflicts of interest and establish mechanisms for maximizing transparency and confidentiality of review processes. These qualities may be enhanced by rotation and turnaround of members to allow inflow of new ideas and accountability. The conditions of appointment must clearly indicate the decision on whether to release professional profiles to the public, level of accessibility, members’ cost recovery ceilings for EC-related activities, confidentiality, and any other mechanisms geared to enhancing confidence over the EC’s operations. The pros and cons of each option must be carefully considered and communicated to candidates. Both scientific and support staff must sign a confidentiality agreement and declare any conflicts of interest from the outset.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Overview

According to the G-TMRCC and the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the primary scope of information assessed by the National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC) and the institutional ethics committees (ECs) relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in health research studies. The NatHREC and the institutional ECs must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable. (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations). The NatHREC is responsible for ensuring an independent, timely, and competent review of all ethical aspects of the clinical trial protocol. TZA-5 states that the NatHREC must function in accordance with national and international standards and guidelines on health research, and guided specifically by the ethical principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki (TZA-30), international ethical guidelines such as the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13), and the G-EthicsHR-TZA.

As indicated in the G-ResearchIntegrity, institutional ECs review, approve, and recommend for approval, research proposals that have met scientific merit, ethical, and professional standards. The institutional ECs are expected to provide recommendations on proposals that would need approval from a nationally overseeing ethics body where available. Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, institutional ECs act as independent reviewers of any proposed study on human research participants to ensure ethical conduct of research and that participant’s rights and welfare are not violated. The major responsibility of institutional ECs is to safeguard the rights, safety, and well-being of research participants. In addition, it is essential that they review the scientific soundness of the research protocols, which involves a proper scientific review to verify that a competent expert body has determined the research to be scientifically sound, or consult with qualified experts to ensure that the research design and methods are appropriate. If the EC does not have expertise to judge science or feasibility, they must draw on relevant expertise. See G-EthicsHR-TZA for more information on the scientific review.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

National Health Research Ethics Committee

As per the TMMDAct, the CT-Regs, and the G-AppConductCT, the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) and the NatHREC must approve a clinical trial application prior to the sponsor, the contract research organization (CRO), or the principal investigator (PI) initiating the clinical trial. According to the G-AppConductCT and TZA-4, the TMDA and NatHREC reviews may be conducted in parallel. However, the TMDA application must include a copy of the national EC's acknowledgement of receipt for the study protocol. In addition, the TMDA's approval will only be finalized once national EC approval is obtained.

As described in TZA-31, the NatHREC’s ethics review is managed through its Research Ethics Information Management System (REIMS) (TZA-32) (also referred to as the National Health Research Management Information System (NHRMIS)), an online web application for the submission of research protocols for NatHREC’s review, validation of protocols per NatHREC checklist (TZA-1), online review of proposals, and application status tracking. The G-RevPrtcl indicates that the NatHREC Secretariat will validate submissions for completeness upon receipt in REIMS. The G-RevPrtcl recommends the following review sequence after the materials are checked for completeness: write comments in an MS Word document; read the PI’s cover letter, the institution’s commitment letter, and other supporting letters; review the abstract/summary; review the application form, protocol, and appendices; and synthesize and submit comments online through REIMS (TZA-32). Per TZA-5, following successful validation of an application to the REIMS, the system generates a unique protocol number/identifier; this unique identifier must be used in reference to all communications to the PI or applicant regarding the application. Depending on the research area of the submitted protocols, at least two (2) primary reviewers must be assigned to review a new protocol by the NatHREC Secretariat. Comments from reviewers will reach the PI within two (2) days, depending on the type of study protocol. If the applicant fails to respond to the comments within 30 days, the NatHREC Secretariat must notify the PI of its intent to remove the protocol from the REIMS. Once the research protocol is removed from the REIMS, the PI must re-apply for ethical clearance and pay the application fee. For clinical trial applications, reviewers’ comments and the outcome of the NatHREC meeting must be forwarded to the PI within 30 days from the date of acceptance by the NatHREC. If the research protocol is cleared and the ethical clearance certificate is issued, the PI must receive it via mail at the institution’s postal address. Additionally, the PI may be able to download the soft copy of the ethical clearance certificate from the REIMS account. A PI may appeal a decision in writing to the Medical Research Coordination Committee (MRCC) Chairperson within 30 days of receipt of the decision, stating the precise issues upon which the appeal is based. The MRCC will respond to PIs in writing within 30 days or upon scrutiny of the appeal. The MRCC Chairperson may invite the PI to appear in person to the MRCC within 30 days of receiving the written appeal.

Expedited Review

TZA-5 delineates the categories of research that qualify for NatHREC expedited review:

Research activities that present no more than minimal risk to human participants
Minor changes (modification or amendment) to a previously approved research proposal
Studies that involve interviews of a non-confidential nature and not likely to harm the status or interest of study participants
Studies that involve collection of small amounts of biological specimens by non-invasive means (e.g., body fluids, excreta, hair or nail in non-disfiguring or threatening manner) for local analysis and no transfer of specimens outside of Tanzania
Collection of data for research purposes through non-invasive procedures (not involving general anesthesia or sedation), routinely employed in clinical practices and using medical devices which have been already approved for use
Research involving data, documents, or specimens that have been already collected or will be collected for on-going medical treatment or diagnosis
Continuing review of certain research previously approved by the NatHREC
Research that aligns with disease outbreaks or public health emergencies
TZA-5 states that expedited review must be conducted by two (2) or more experienced reviewers designated by the Secretariat. The expedited review must include a review of the complete study protocol with all required attachments. Results of the review process may be communicated to the PI even before being reported to the NatHREC. Expedited reviewers may exercise all the authorities of the committee except that the NatHREC reviewers may not disapprove of the research. Any research activity may be disapproved only after reviewing the protocol in accordance with the non-expedited procedure. Approval for expedited protocols is given by the MRCC through the Chairperson upon recommendation for approval from the reviewers. Once expedited approval has been granted, the protocol may be implemented as approved. Clinical trials with investigational products (IP) are not eligible for expedited review but may be considered for accelerated review. The final decision for a protocol to undergo an expedited review is determined by the NatHREC Chairperson, the NatHREC Secretariat, and/or the MRCC Chairperson, as needed. The Secretariat must notify the NatHREC of all expedited reviews at the next scheduled meeting through a listing in the meeting agenda.

Reviews During Public Health Events

Per TZA-5, rapid review of public health research and clinical trials may be implemented during public health events of national and/or international concern. During public health emergencies, the declaration will come from the public health authority of the country or an internationally recognized organization responsible for international public health. To expedite commencement of the research, many of the preliminary research processes (drafting of documents, translations, approvals) will be allowed to happen in parallel. Protocols should be sent to reviewers within 24 hours of submission by the Secretariat, and reviewers should complete their reviews within three (3) days. The consolidated review and suggested revisions (or approval) should be communicated to the PI(s) within five (5) days. The PI should respond to the review notification within 48 hours. See TZA-5 for additional details on the emergency review requirements.

Approval Duration

Regarding duration of the NatHREC approval, per TZA-5, the NatHREC Secretariat determines how often the committee must re-evaluate the research study, appropriate to the degree of risk, but not less than once per year. Studies whose approval has expired must be suspended until an extension through a renewal process is approved. The PI must submit an electronic continuing review report through REIMS with a frequency as indicated in the terms and conditions of the ethics clearance certificate. The NatHREC Secretary must place the continuing review report on the next meeting’s agenda for review. The NatHREC may provide directives or guidance to the study following review that will be communicated to the PI. In addition, the committee may recommend that the research study is halted.

Protocol Amendments

Per TZA-5, the NatHREC recognizes certain protocol amendments as minor/insubstantial or major/substantial; see TZA-5 for examples of each type. Amendments made to protocols may not be implemented until approved by the NatHREC. Upon receipt of the amendment package, the Secretariat must follow the receiving and validation procedures of submitted protocols. After review of the amendment submission, the Secretariat must determine whether the protocol requires expedited or full review. The amended protocol will be sent to the reviewers of the original submission; in absence of the original reviewers, the Secretariat must appoint and send the amendment application to another reviewer with the same or similar expertise. The number of reviewers will range from one (1) to three (3), depending on the number of the amendments. Minor amendments may be reviewed by members of the Secretariat. If the committee requires modifications to any of the documents, specific changes required must be communicated to the PI with instructions to make the necessary changes and resubmit the documents to the Secretariat. If the committee does not recommend approval of the protocol amendment, this information will be communicated to the MRCC who will review the decision and make the final decision on the approval. If an application is not approved, the PI must be informed of the reasons for not approving the amendment.

Institutional Ethics Committees

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, ordinary review is the institution’s normal process for reviewing minimal or more than minimal risk studies. For research that is externally sponsored, the ethical standards should not be less stringent than they would be for research carried out in the country of the sponsoring organization. Local ECs must be fully empowered to disapprove a study they believe is unethical. An EC must require that information given to research participants as part of informed consent complies with the general requirements for informed consent. However, the EC may require that more information be given to the research participants, provided such additional information would meaningfully add to the protection of the rights and the welfare of the research participants. An EC must generally require documentation of the informed consent process. For certain types of research, however, the EC may need the investigator to administer a comprehension test (or test of understanding) to ensure that prospective research participants have acquired adequate knowledge of the relevant facts and consequences of participation in the study. Within 14 days of its review, the EC must notify investigators in writing of the outcome of the research protocol review. If an EC does not approve a research activity, it must include in its written notification a statement of the reasons for its decision.

The G-ResearchIntegrity states that ECs must review protocols in accordance with their standard operating procedures (SOPs) and in a timely and professional manner. Names, titles, and institutional affiliation of reviewers for each proposal will be kept confidential. The decision should be communicated to the investigators in a written letter that is signed or stamped by the EC chair. The letter should include the research/study title as written in the application, the name of the applicant, research site, draft number, date submitted, name and date of EC sitting for that proposal, suggested changes, and a clear statement of final decision by EC. The investigators must notify the EC of protocol amendments, unforeseen circumstances affecting the study, termination of the study, progress reporting, and study termination before or at completion. ECs should also establish monitoring and/or inspection mechanisms for ongoing research projects to ensure compliance with approved criteria.

Expedited Review

As delineated in the G-EthicsHR-TZA, expedited review is a process by which studies that involve no more than minimal risk may be reviewed and approved in a timely manner by an individual EC member or a designated subset of the full EC. Relevant authorities or ECs must establish a list of criteria for protocols that qualify for an expedited review process. Further, relevant authorities or ECs may establish procedures for the expedited review of research protocols, which should specify the following:

The nature of the applications, amendments, and other considerations that will be eligible for expedited review
The minimum number of committee members required for expedited review
The status of decisions (for example, subject to confirmation by a full EC or not)
Accelerated Review

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, an accelerated review process may be used for a clinical trial protocol submitted for ethical approval. In reviewing a clinical trial, reviewers may exercise all the authorities of the committee to recommend approval of the submitted protocol. Final approval for protocol is granted in accordance with the standard procedures outlined above. However, applications for accelerated review of clinical trial protocols will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the EC, and the applicant may be required to undergo an ordinary review process due to the nature of the trial or else, as determined by the EC.

Continuing Review

As required in the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the EC must conduct additional reviews on approved studies as necessary, particularly if there are significant changes in the protocol that require re-consent by participants or affect the safety of participants, or if other ethical matters emerge during the study. These further reviews include amendments, progress reports submitted by researchers, and possible monitoring of researchers’ compliance with approved protocols. For approved studies, ECs must conduct continuing review of research at intervals appropriate to the degree of risk, but not less than once a year, and must have authority to observe or have a third party observe the informed consent process. The EC must investigate research fraud and take appropriate action where scientific fraud has been suspected or proven.

Suspension or Termination

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the EC has the authority to halt, suspend, or terminate approval of research that is not being conducted in accordance with the EC’s requirements, or research that has been associated with unexpected serious harm to research participants. For example, the EC may suspend research when:

It finds that the investigator has implemented significant changes in the research protocol without the prior approval of the EC
The investigator has failed to follow specific procedures or requirements articulated by the EC in its initial review of the research protocol
When there is severe unexpected harm to the research participants, including, but not limited to, serious physical injury or death
Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, any suspension or termination of ethics approval must include a written statement of the reasons for the EC’s action. It must be reported promptly to the investigator(s), appropriate institutional officials, and the National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR) Director General.

Multicenter Research

For multicenter research, the G-EthicsHR-TZA states that the study must be conducted in a methodologically identical way at each center, and ECs at individual centers have the authority to adapt the informed consent document provided by the lead institution to make it culturally appropriate. To avoid lengthy procedures, multicenter research within Tanzania should be reviewed by only one (1) EC and other applicable ECs should accept that review. To be informed of the necessary approach, the study team should be consulted. In cases of multicenter research, if a local review committee proposes changes to the original protocol that it believes are necessary to protect the research participants, these changes must be reported to the research institution or sponsor responsible for the whole research program for consideration and possible action. This should ensure that all persons are protected and that the research will be valid across sites. Ideally, review procedures should be harmonized, which may decrease the time needed for review and, accordingly, speed up the research process. Joint reviews may be organized and requested by the study team or sponsor across country borders or institutions in compliance with guidelines. Joint reviews are based on voluntary cooperation between the relevant national regulatory authorities and ECs. In the case of multi-country joint reviews, each country is solely responsible for granting regulatory or ethics approval to the sites within its borders. To harmonize review processes and to maintain sufficient quality of these processes, ECs should develop quality indicators for ethical review.

Exemption

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, some studies may be exempt from EC review. If an investigator considers that their research project satisfies the requirements for exemption from ethics review, the EC must ensure that the proposed research satisfies the requirements for exemption from EC review and grant exemption through procedures set by the EC. The following studies may be exempt from EC review:

Research with negligible risk that involves using existing collections of data or records that contain only non-identifiable data about human beings
Use of publicly available unlinked data that does not identify individuals or communities
Use of existing collections of data or records that contain only non-identifiable data about human beings
Quality assurance/evaluation activities undertaken in the normal course of conducting the business of the institution, i.e., educational assessments, student feedback surveys, audits of organizational activities and systems, and quality assurance reviews
Emergency use of a test article provided that such emergency use is reported to the EC within five (5) working days; any subsequent use of the test article at the institution is subject to EC approval
Health systems research if public officials are interviewed in their official capacity on issues that are in the public domain
Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
National Health Research Ethics Committee

According to the G-TMRCC, the National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC) requires the sponsor, the contract research organization, or the principal investigator (PI) to pay a nonrefundable fee to submit a clinical trial research protocol for ethical review and approval.

As per TZA-17, the fees are as follows:

Tanzanian researchers, expedited review – 3,875,000 Tanzanian Shillings
Tanzanian researchers, ordinary review – 2,625,000 Tanzanian Shillings
Tanzanian researchers, amendment – 750,000 Tanzanian Shillings
Tanzanian researchers, extension – 300,000 Tanzanian Shillings
Tanzanian students, expedited review – 390,625 Tanzanian Shillings
Tanzanian students, ordinary review – 390,625 Tanzanian Shillings
Tanzanian students, amendment – 250,000 Tanzanian Shillings
Tanzanian students, extension – 125,000 Tanzanian Shillings
International researchers, expedited review – $5,125 USD
International researchers, ordinary review – $2,625 USD
International researchers, amendment – $750 USD
International researchers, extension – $300 USD
International students, expedited review – $548 USD
International students, ordinary review – $548 USD
International students, amendment – $375 USD
International students, extension – $125 USD
See TZA-17 for appeal fees and late renewal penalties.

Payment Instructions

No information is current available regarding payment instructions for the NatHREC.

Institutional Ethics Committees

Institutionally based ethics committees (ECs) may independently decide whether to charge fees for a protocol review. Per the G-ResearchIntegrity, ECs should delineate procedures for the fee structure, mode of payment, and proof of payment in their standard operating procedures (SOPs). Applicants should contact ECs individually for specific fees and payment instructions.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Overview

As mandated by the MedRsrchAct, the National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR) is the central body responsible for oversight, and for the promotion and coordination of research in Tanzania. The NIMR is a semi-autonomous organization under the Ministry of Health (MoH). The IERC-Accredit, the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the G-TMRCC, and TZA-5 state that the NIMR’s Medical Research Coordination Committee (MRCC) serves as the national health research coordinating body, and is responsible for supervising health research in Tanzania. The MRCC, as the NIMR’s clearance body, delegates the registration, review, approval, and monitoring of research to the National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC), which is a subcommittee of the MRCC. The NatHREC focuses on the ethical issues surrounding submitted research proposals. All clinical trial protocols to be conducted in Tanzania are also reviewed by a specialized nine (9)-member Clinical Trials Sub-Committee, which meets monthly and reports to the NatHREC. For detailed information on NatHREC responsibilities, see the G-TMRCC, the G-EthicsHR-TZA, and TZA-5.

TZA-5 acknowledges that not all human subjects research requires review and approval at the national level—i.e., research that does not involve investigational products or collaboration with foreign institutions. For studies that may not need national review, the local ethics committee (EC) must submit quarterly reports listing studies that were approved by the local EC. The NatHREC may request any information related to approved research studies at the institutional level, and ECs are subject to audit.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, institutions that intend to establish an institutional EC must make a written request to the Director General of NIMR and, upon approval, submit quarterly and annual progress reports to NIMR. In the initial request, the institution must indicate that it will comply with the following minimum requirements:

A statement of principles governing the institution's discharge of its responsibilities for protecting the rights and welfare of human research participants of research conducted at or sponsored by the institution; this may include an appropriate existing code, declaration, or statement of ethical principles or a statement formulated by the institution itself
Details on ensuring meeting space availability and sufficient staff and resources to support the EC’s review and record-keeping duties
A list of members identified by name, qualifications, profession, representative capacity, indicators, or experience such as board certification, and licenses
Written procedures for monitoring the conduct of studies approved by the EC
As delineated in the IERC-Accredit, institutional ECs may apply for accreditation. Registered and accredited ECs support the NatHREC function of facilitating institutional ethical clearance and monitoring the approved research studies at the level of the institutions to which they belong or are affiliated. ECs are not mandated to approve research protocols for clinical trials and those involving foreign collaborators. These types of research are cleared at the national level only. Following are the EC accreditation assessment criteria:

Suitability of infrastructure and office space for EC activities
Adequacy of equipment to support ethics review management
Adequacy of qualified EC Secretariat staff (technical and support staff) to manage the ethics review procedures
Appropriateness of the EC governance and structure
Plan for capacity building/training program for the EC Secretariat, members, and reviewers
Plan for monitoring of research activities by the EC
Adequacy of institutional support services
Appropriateness of EC standard operating procedures (SOPs)
The IERC-Accredit indicates that ECs approved for full accreditation will be published on the NIMR website. The duration of accreditation is three (3) years from the date of notification (certification) by NIMR. Applications for renewal must be made six (6) months before the expiry of the accreditation period. Failure to renew accreditation or failure to maintain the appropriate standards for continuity of accreditation will mean that the accreditation status of the EC will lapse at the end of the current accreditation period and the committee must cease to function. Accreditation must be terminated if NIMR, in consultation with NatHREC, finds that the accredited EC has failed to maintain the required standards. See IERC-Accredit for additional accreditation information, including application procedures and reporting.

See the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology’s (COSTECH) and the G-ResearchIntegrity for institutional guidance on the introduction and strengthening of research integrity mechanisms. When such mechanisms are well established, institutional ECs can advance to a stage of accreditation.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Overview

According to the TMMDAct, the CT-Regs, and the G-AppConductCT, the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) requires the sponsor, the designated contract research organization (CRO), or the investigator to obtain TMDA approval. Per TZA-5, the principal investigator (PI) is required to submit an application for ethical review of a research study to the national ethics committee (EC), the National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC). All clinical trials must get ethics approval from both the institutional EC and the NatHREC. TZA-18 states that if there is no institutional EC available, the approval must be obtained from NatHREC. According to the G-AppConductCT and TZA-4, TMDA and NatHREC reviews may be conducted in parallel. However, the TMDA application must include a copy of the NatHREC's acknowledgement of receipt for the study protocol. In addition, the TMDA's approval will only be finalized once NatHREC approval is obtained.

Per the G-ResearchClearance, the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH) must review and approve all research in Tanzania.

Regulatory Submission

Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority

Per the G-AppConductCT, applicants must submit both paper and electronic copies of the clinical trial application (CTA). Per TZA-4 and TZA-36, electronic CTAs must be completed online via the Regulatory Information Management System (RIMS) Customer Self Service Portal (TZA-34). Applicants must fill out CTAs as per the Modules and the Common Technical Document (CTD) highlighted in the G-AppConductCT. Applications for amendment(s) to a previously authorized clinical trial must be submitted on the applicable form in RIMS. The clinical trial application form is available at TZA-38, and the application forms for protocol amendments are at TZA-43 and TZA-44. Note that a list of clinical trial forms is posted to TZA-35.

Per the G-AppConductCT, the hard copy of the application may be delivered in person or by courier to the TMDA at the following address:

Mabibo External along Mandela Express way
P.O. Box 77150
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania

In addition, TZA-34 provides applicants with various online regulatory services.

As per the G-AppConductCT and the TZA-36, applicants must submit paper (A4) and electronic copies. The paper documents should be arranged in spring file folders. The G-AppConductCT specifies that the electronic documents should be in MS Word format, Bookman Old Style font size 11 and submitted on CD-ROM. TZA-36 requires electronic format on CDs. The number of copies to be submitted is not specified in the G-AppConductCT. Annex 1 of the G-AppConductCT provides the Clinical Trial Application Form template. Applicants should submit their applications as per the Modules in the G-AppConductCT and the CTD highlighted in the G-AppConductCT. The overall organization of the CTD format should not be modified.

Per the G-AppConductCT and TZA-4, all applications and supporting documents must be in English. The informed consent documents must be in both Kiswahili and English.

Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology

Per the G-ResearchClearance, the PI should submit an application for a research permit. It must be submitted to the Director General of COSTECH through the online system (TZA-48) at least three (3) months before the intended commencement of research in Tanzania. According to TZA-47, when the online COSTECH system is not working, applicants should email COSTECH at either rclearance@costech.or.tz or dg@costech.or.tz. After a foreign researcher obtains a research permit, the researcher is required to apply for a class C residence permit from the Tanzanian Immigration Services Department. See the G-ResearchClearance and TZA-47 for additional information about applying for a research permit through the National Research Clearance Committee (NRCC).

Ethics Review Submission

National Health Research Ethics Committee

The TZA-5 specifies that the NatHREC requires all applicants to complete the Application Form for Ethics Approval (see Form 03 in TZA-5) with the research protocol to obtain ethics approval. PIs or applicants must submit all required documents at least two (2) months prior to the commencement of the research study, and they must select either an expedited or ordinary review (for the case of clinical trials, an accelerated review) and pay the relevant fee. An application for ethical review of a research study should be made by the PI for that study. Applications may not be submitted by the sponsor(s) on behalf of the PI. Applications must be accompanied by a completed checklist (TZA-1). As described in the G-RevPrtcl, TZA-5, and TZA-31, applicants should submit the form to the online Research Ethics Information Management System (REIMS) (TZA-32) (also referred to as the National Health Research Management Information System (NHRMIS)).

The G-TMRCC indicates that four (4) copies of the research proposal with a cover letter should be submitted to the NatHREC.

Institutional Ethics Committees

While the submission requirements will vary by institution, the G-ResearchIntegrity indicates that the lead researcher or PI is responsible for submitting a research proposal to the EC. The institutional EC’s procedures for receiving an application should be clearly stated, and could include some of the following submission elements:

The name and/or title of the EC member who will receive applications
Application template or standard forms for submitting applications
Recommended channel for submissions (e.g., email) and format (e.g., MS word)
Proper submission of supporting documents with the application
Use of appropriate language (as recommended) and number of copies
Name and addresses of contact person for follow up with comments
Fee structure, mode of payment, and process for submitting proof of payment
Applicable procedures for proposal amendments, submissions, and supporting tools
Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority

As per the CT-Regs and the G-AppConductCT, the following documentation must be submitted to the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA):

Comprehensive table of contents
Cover letter
Application form (See the Regulatory Information Management System (RIMS) Customer Self Service Portal (TZA-34) or Annex 1 of the G-AppConductCT and First Schedule of the CT-Regs)
General investigational plan
Capacity building plans (including plans for staff training and updates)
Overall summary of the protocol (See Annex 2 of the G-AppConductCT)
Protocol, signed and approved with data compiled as prescribed in Annex 3 of G-AppConductCT and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13), including case report form (CRF) copies or descriptions; See TZA-42 for a clinical trial protocol template
Participant Information Leaflet, informed consent forms (ICFs), and any other information to be given to participants
Declarations by the principal investigator (PI) (TZA-39), co/sub investigators (TZA-41), and monitors (TZA-40) (Also see Annexes 5-7 of the G-AppConductCT)
Joint declaration by sponsor and national PI in format prescribed in Annex 8 of the G-AppConductCT
Investigator’s Brochure (IB), nonclinical overall summary (See Annex 10 of the G-AppConductCT), and prescribing information data sheet, if applicable
Certified copy of insurance of research participants
Ethics clearance certificate or a copy of protocol submission acknowledgement from the National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR)’s National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC) or any approved medical research institute
Investigator(s) Curriculum Vitae(s) (CVs) (See Annex 9 of the G-AppConductCT)
Blank CRFs and serious adverse events reporting form to be used in the study
Certificate of good manufacturing practice (GMP) for manufacture of the trial medicine or other evidence of manufacturing quality, safety, and consistency
GMP certificate for manufacture of the placebo, if applicable
Investigational product (IP) labels and packages insert(s)
Mock-up labels for IPs
Evidence of accreditation/certifications of the designated laboratories or other evidence of good laboratory practice
Letters of access (if applicable) authorizing the TMDA to access related files
Copies of key, peer-reviewed published articles supporting the application
Completed, quality overall summary – Chemical Entities Template (See Annex 11 of the G-AppConductCT)
Investigational medicinal product dossier
Application fees
Summaries of nonclinical, clinical, and quality data (See Module 2 of the G-AppConductCT)
Quality of the IP (See Module 3 of the G-AppConductCT)
Nonclinical study reports (See Module 4 of the G-AppConductCT)
Clinical study reports (See Module 5 of the G-AppConductCT)
As delineated in G-AppConductCT, an application must not cross reference the details or documentation between different clinical trials. The applicant must include a statement indicating that all the information in the application is complete and accurate. In the case of multi-center trials, a coordinating investigator must also sign the application form. If the trial is part of an international study, information must be provided regarding the other participating countries and the part of the trial that will be conducted locally.

In addition, per the G-AppConductCT, applicants can submit an application for amendment to a previously authorized clinical trial, using the required forms (Annexes 12 and 13). The sponsor or sponsor’s agent must submit the following to the TMDA:

Amendment fees
Description and reasons for the proposed amendment
Original wording, revised wording, and the rationale for the change, including a complete protocol incorporating all amendments
Supporting data for the amendment: updated overall risk-benefit assessment, possible consequences for participants already in the trial and for assessment of trial results, and summaries of data
For details on when TMDA approval must be obtained for amendments, see G-AppConductCT.

Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology

According to the G-ResearchClearance and TZA-47, to obtain a research permit for a clinical trial, the following must be submitted to the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH) (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

A full research proposal, including a summary, abstract, introduction, research objectives, problem statement, hypotheses or questions framework, methodologies, and timeframe
Literature review
Beneficiaries of the research
Bibliography
Detailed CV(s) of all researchers
Sponsor’s cover letter
For foreign applicants, scientific and ethics committee approval from an institution in the PI’s country of residence
Clearance from the TMDA
A supporting letter from a Tanzanian affiliate institution
A Tanzanian applicant should submit either a copy of their national ID, passport details, driving license, or voters ID
A foreign applicant should submit a copy of their passport details page and a current passport size photo with a blue background
A scanned copy of a receipt as proof of payment of the non-refundable research application fee to COSTECH (See Regulatory Fees section for details)
The G-ResearchClearance indicates that an application to renew a permit must contain a renewal application form, an annual progress report, a supporting letter of recommendation from the affiliate institution, passport information, updated CVs, and an extension table form.

Ethics Committee Requirements

National Health Research Ethics Committee

As per the G-TMRCC, the G-RevPrtcl, and the NatHREC’s Checklist for Ethical Clearance Application Submission (see TZA-1), the NatHREC requires applicants to submit the following documentation for ethics approval (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Application Form for Ethics Approval (see Form 3 in TZA-5 and the Research Ethics Information Management System (REIMS) (TZA-32))
Full protocol, including benefits sharing, placebo rationale, information on randomization/blinding, and a commitment to register the trial in a public registry
Cover letter signed by PI or co-PI
Summary, introduction, and literature review
Statement of the problem, the rationale, and study objectives
Budget and budget justification
Ethical consideration (e.g., written information to be provided to participants in English and Kiswahili, obtaining verbal/written informed consent, obligations of investigators and sponsors, benefits and risks of study participation, recruitment, cultural values, and confidentiality measures)
Limitations of the study
Information on the study site(s)
Review of the known risks and if they are acceptable for the expected benefit
Interim analysis and stopping rules
Dissemination of research results
Commitment letter from affiliated institution and/or local government officials
Letter from student supervisors
ICFs/Assent Forms in English and Kiswahili
EC approval certificate from affiliating institution(s), where applicable
Methodology, including data collection tools in English and Kiswahili
Elaborated recruitment procedure
Research team CVs
Evidence of payment of application and registration fees (Bank slip)
Completed Data Transfer Agreement (see TZA-8) and/or Material Transfer Agreement (see TZA-10), where applicable
IBs and CRFs
Proof of insurance coverage
List of Data and Safety Monitoring Board members (with at least one (1) Tanzanian)
Per TZA-5, a request for amendment of a previously approved protocol must describe the requested amendment, provide the rationale for the amendment, and describe the impact, if any, of the amendment on the protocol’s risk-benefit profile.

Institutional Ethics Committees

While the submission requirements vary by institution, the G-ResearchIntegrity indicates that the following are typically required:

Completed application, signed by the lead investigator/researcher(s)
Full proposal completed in all sections with supporting documents
A lay summary of the application and/or a flow chart representing key milestones
Description of ethical issues pertaining to the research, and how they will be managed
Tools for operationalizing the research and how they will be applied
Safety issues related to the use of instruments, materials, and research data
Investigators’ CVs, up to date and signed
Research context, including criteria for identifying research participants, research environment, and relevant protection measures
Information to be provided to participants, which may include tools and use of local translators, if needed
Procedures for informed consent by participants
Compensation plans for research participants, if any
Description of indemnity and/or insurance coverage for participants, if applicable
A history of rejection of the same research protocol, reasons for rejection, and measures taken to address the concerns; withholding such information should be regarded as misconduct and managed in accordance with misconduct guidelines
Clinical Protocol

The G-AppConductCT indicates that the protocol should state the background, rationale, and objectives of the trial, and describe its design, methodology and organization, including statistical considerations, and the conditions under which it is to be performed and managed. In addition, Tanzania requires the following protocol contents in the format prescribed in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13):

General information (protocol title, identifying number, and date; contact information for the sponsor, medical expert, investigator(s), trial site(s), qualified physician(s), and laboratory and/or institutions involved in the study)
Background information
Objectives and purpose
Trial design
Selection, withdrawal, and treatment of participants
Assessment of efficacy
Assessment of safety
A description of the statistical methods to be used in the trial
Direct access to source data and documents
Quality control and quality assurance
Ethical considerations
Data handling and recordkeeping
Publication policy
The G-EthicsHR-TZA states that research protocols submitted for ethics review and approval must, at the least, include the following information:

A clear statement of the objectives of the research, the present state of knowledge, and a justification for undertaking the research
A precise description of all proposed procedures and interventions, including the duration of the study
A statistical analysis plan
Description of the study population, including the number of study participants to be recruited
The inclusion and exclusion criteria for study participants and procedures for the withdrawal of individual participants
Complete details of the informed consent process, including the proposed means of obtaining informed consent (or assent in case of minors)
Evidence that the investigators are appropriately qualified and experienced, and have adequate facilities for the safe and efficient conduct of the research
Provisions that will be made to protect the confidentiality of information/data obtained from research participants
The study tool(s) (e.g., questionnaires, CRFs, videos, flip charts, and other data collection tools)
Also see the G-RevPrtcl for additional guidance on the NatHREC’s review of the protocol.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Overview

Based on the TMMDAct, the CT-Regs, and the G-AppConductCT, the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA)'s approval of a clinical trial application is dependent upon obtaining proof of ethical approval from the national ethics committee (EC), the National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC). According to the G-AppConductCT, TMDA and NatHREC reviews may be conducted in parallel. However, the TMDA application must include a copy of the NatHREC's acknowledgement of receipt for the study protocol. In addition, the TMDA's approval will only be finalized once NatHREC approval is obtained. As per the G-ResearchClearance, after receiving TMDA and NatHREC approvals, the researcher must submit an application for research clearance to the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH).

Regulatory Authority Approval

Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority

According to the G-AppConductCT, the TMDA review process is conducted on a first-in, first out basis. The TMDA will evaluate complete applications within 60 working days of receiving the application. The fast-track evaluation provides that a new clinical trial application may be fast tracked and assessed within 30 working days of its submission if the applicant has requested and paid twice the prescribed clinical trial application fee. The CTC-Time validates the timelines in the G-AppConductCT.

As set forth in the TMMDAct, the CT-Regs, and the G-AppConductCT, the TMDA coordinates the clinical trial application process. Upon receipt of a clinical trial application, the TMDA initially screens the application for completeness. If complete, the TMDA officer acknowledges receipt of the application by returning a signed copy of the cover sheet to the applicant (see Annex 1 of the G-AppConductCT or First Schedule of the CT-Regs). Per the G-AppConductCT, the TMDA may request clarification, certificates, and/or samples through a query letter. Once a query has been raised and sent to the applicant, the evaluation process stops until the TMDA receives a written response to the query. The response should be submitted within six (6) months after the query letter was issued. In addition, TMDA reserves the right to request information or set conditions not specifically described in the G-AppConductCT to allow it to adequately assess the safety, efficacy, or quality of an investigational product (IP). If authorization is not granted, an appeal may be submitted to the TMDA within 60 days of the TMDA’s decision. If no appeal is submitted by the applicant within this period or, if after consideration of any comments submitted, the TMDA is still not satisfied, it must reject the application.

The TMMDAct states that the TMDA Director General must issue a Clinical Trial Certificate to authorize the trial to be conducted. Per the G-AppConductCT, the TMDA’s clinical trial authorization will be valid up to the proposed duration of the study indicated in the application. However, the validity will not extend beyond five (5) years. If the trial needs more than five (5) years, the applicant must request an extension. If granted, the TMDA will issue an updated certificate.

Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology

The G-ResearchClearance indicates that once COSTECH receives a new application, the Secretariat screens the application for completeness; registers the application; and sends an acknowledgement to the applicant within five (5) business days. If approved after COSTECH’s review, the principal investigator (PI) is then required to collect the research permit certificate from COSTECH. Per TZA-47, COSTECH’s review committee meets every two (2) months, and applicants are advised to apply two (2) months before the research commencement date.

Ethics Committee Approval

National Health Research Ethics Committee

As set forth in the G-TMRCC and TZA-5, the NatHREC meets once a month to evaluate application submissions. TZA-5 indicates an e-mail notification acknowledging receipt and successful validation of the clinical trial application must be sent to the PI or applicant by NatHREC within two (2) working days from the date of receipt. Comments from reviewers will reach the PI within two (2) days through the Research Ethics Information Management System (REIMS) (TZA-32) (also referred to as the National Health Research Management Information System (NHRMIS)), depending on the type of study protocol. If the PI or applicant fails to respond to the committee’s and reviewers’ comments within 30 days, the NatHREC Secretariat must notify the PI of intent to remove the protocol from the REIMS. For clinical trials applications, reviewers’ comments and the outcome of the NatHREC meeting must be forwarded to the PI within 30 days from the date of acceptance by the NatHREC. A PI may appeal that decision in writing to the Medical Research Coordination Committee (MRCC) Chairperson within 30 days of receipt of the decision. The MRCC will respond to PIs in writing within 30 days or upon scrutiny of the appeal. The MRCC Chairperson may invite the PI to appear in person to the MRCC within 30 days of receiving the written appeal. For protocol reviews during public health events of national and/or international concern, protocols should be sent to reviewers within 24 hours of submission by the Secretariat. Reviewers should complete their reviews within three (3) days. The consolidated review and suggested revisions (or approval) should be communicated to the PI(s) within five (5) days. The PI should respond to the review notification within 48 hours.

Per TZA-18, the whole process of receiving, reviewing, and approving the protocols takes a maximum of six (6) weeks.

Institutional Ethics Committees

According to TZA-5, the institutional EC review may occur prior to the proposal review by the NatHREC as the application to the NatHREC requires an EC approval certificate from an affiliated institution(s), where applicable (i.e., for foreign sponsors and when an institution has an EC). As required in the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the EC must notify investigators in writing of the review decision within 14 days of its review.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the TMMDAct, the CT-Regs, and the G-AppConductCT, a clinical trial can only commence after an applicant receives permission from the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) and approval from the national ethics committee (EC), the National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR)’s National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC). Per the G-ResearchClearance, following TMDA and NatHREC approvals, the applicant must also apply to the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH) for review, registration, and to obtain a research permit prior to initiating a study. No waiting period is required following the applicant’s receipt of these approvals.

In addition, as per the TMMDAct, the CT-Regs, the TFDCA-ImptExpt, and the G-AppConductCT, the sponsor or the principal investigator (PI) is required to obtain an import license for the shipment of an investigational product to be used in the trial. (See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information).

Clinical Trial Agreement

Prior to the trial’s commencement, the G-AppConductCT specifies that the protocol must be dated and signed by the investigator, the host institution, and the sponsor, and can function as a contract. In addition, as per the G-CTInsurance-TZA, a clinical trial agreement must be signed by the chief executive of the host institution, the sponsor, and the PI. G-EthicsHR-TZA also states that the PI must sign the protocol and holds primary responsibility for managing and ensuring the integrity of the research study from initiation to finalization.

Per the G-AppConductCT, the sponsor and researchers are required to conduct the clinical trial in compliance with applicable Tanzanian laws and regulations and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13). TZA-13 states that the sponsor is responsible for obtaining agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. Quality control should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been correctly processed. A written agreement must be signed by both the sponsor and the investigator, or any other parties involved with the clinical trial, verifying that both parties agree to the trial protocol, the monitoring and auditing practices, the standard operating procedures (SOPs), and their respective duties. The sponsor must also obtain the investigator(s)’ and the institution(s)’ agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with TZA-13, applicable regulatory requirement(s), and the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and approved by the EC
Comply with data recording and reporting procedures
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain essential documents until the sponsor indicates that they are no longer needed
Also, per the CT-Regs, the sponsor must ensure that all agreements made with the PI and any other parties involved in a clinical trial are in writing, as part of the protocol or in a separate agreement.

Clinical Trial Registration

As per the CT-Regs and the G-AppConductCT, all clinical trials taking place in Tanzania must be registered with the Tanzania Clinical Trials Registry (TzCTR) which is accessed via the Regulatory Information Management System (RIMS) Customer Self Service Portal (TZA-34). An applicant must submit detailed clinical trial information to the TzCTR not later than 21 days after the first participant is enrolled in the trial. See the CT-Regs for complete registry submission requirements. The G-AppConductCT further stipulates that applicants have the option to register in any other publicly accessible registries accepting international clinical trial information and recognized by the World Health Organization (WHO). The registration number should be made available to the TMDA.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

In accordance with the CT-Regs, the G-ReptSafetyData, and the G-AppConductCT, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Tanzania’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any adverse medical occurrence in a research participant to whom a drug product was administered, and which does not necessarily bear a causal relationship to the treatment
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – All noxious and unintended responses to a medicinal product related to any dose
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or is a congenital anomaly/birth defect
Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR) (also referred to as Unexpected ADR) – A serious adverse reaction where the nature and severity of the event is not consistent with the medicinal product
The PV-Regs reaffirms that the reporting of SAEs and SUSARs occurring during clinical trials should comply with the requirements in the CT-Regs.

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the severity of an AE must be graded as follows:

Mild: Includes events that do not interfere with activities of daily living and do not require treatment
Moderate: Includes events that have minimal effect on activities of daily living and usually require out-patient treatment
Severe: Includes activities that significantly affect activities of daily living and may require inpatient hospitalization
Life-threatening: Includes all events that are life threatening and usually require emergency procedures
Death
The G-EthicsHR-TZA states that an AE must be deemed unexpected if:

It is previously unobserved or undocumented in humans under the health research intervention (or one substantially similar)
The nature or severity is not consistent with information in the investigator’s brochure or other safety information known at the time
The event is observed with higher frequency or severity than previously documented
See the G-EthicsHR-TZA for additional details on grading AEs.

Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

As stated in the G-ReptSafetyData and the G-AppConductCT, the investigator is responsible for documenting and reporting all AEs/ADRs, SAEs/SADRs, and SUSARs to the sponsor using the case report form (CRF)/reporting form and the SAE/SADR Reporting Form approved in the protocol, or CIOMS Form I (TZA-7). See section 3.0 of the G-ReptSafetyData for key data elements to include on the form. TZA-5 requires the principal investigator (PI) to ensure that the protocol includes all required elements for safety monitoring, including assessment and reporting of any anticipated or unanticipated AEs and SAEs. Ethics committees (ECs) (both the National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC) and institutional ECs) must review and address AEs, SAEs, and/or SUSARs. Investigators must be familiar with the regulations, policies, and procedures concerning reporting and continuing review requirements, as well as timelines for submission of notifications and reports.

The CT-Regs states that the PI must immediately report to the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) any SAE/SADR that occurs to a participant at a trial site where the PI is responsible for the conduct of the trial. The report may be made orally or in writing and must be followed up with a written report in 14 days. Also, the PI must report AEs that the protocol identifies as critical to safety evaluations. The reports must identify each participant by a number assigned to that participant in accordance with the protocol.

The CT-Regs further states the PI or sponsor must record and report SUSARs that are fatal or life-threatening to the TMDA within seven (7) days and other SUSARs within 15 days.

The G-EthicsHR-TZA requires the investigator to promptly investigate all SAEs, take appropriate measures to ensure the safety of all research participants, and report these and any other information that is likely to affect the safety of the research participants or the conduct of the research events, to the regulatory authority, institutions, and sponsor within the timelines stated in standard operating procedures. Specifically, the investigator must report the following to the EC and TMDA:

All SAEs irrespective of relationship to the health-related intervention
All unexpected events of greater than moderate severity irrespective of relationship to health-related intervention
All events associated with protocol violations irrespective of severity and relationship to health-related intervention
When criteria for stopping or pausing a study as stipulated in the protocol are met
Any event mandated by regulatory authorities
Any event stipulated in the protocol as reportable to the regulatory bodies
Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, all SAEs must be reported to the local EC as soon as possible and in any case no later than seven (7) days of becoming aware of the event. Thereafter, a detailed report of the SAE should be submitted within eight (8) days. All other reportable AEs should be reported to the EC as soon as possible and in any case not later than 15 days. TZA-5 requires the investigator to submit an initial report on an SAE to NatHREC within 24 hours of its occurrence and a final or followup report on the SAE within 14 days of its occurrence.

Further the G-EthicsHR-TZA requires the investigator to clearly outline in the protocol how management of both foreseeable and unforeseeable AEs will be done. Certain categories of interventions whose long-term effects are not known or cannot be extrapolated will require extended monitoring for AEs, such as genetically modified substances, gene therapy, and DNA-based therapies.

Sponsor Responsibilities

The G-ReptSafetyData states that the sponsor is responsible for the assessment and timely reporting of SAEs/SADRs and SUSARs to the TMDA. The sponsor must retain detailed records of safety information reported by the investigator(s) and ensure that all reports required by the TMDA are submitted on time. In addition, the sponsor must report all SAEs and SUSARs occurring from trial sites outside the country to the TMDA.

The G-ReptSafetyData requires that fatal or life-threatening SAEs/SADRs or SUSARs must be immediately reported to the TMDA by telephone, fax, or email followed by a complete report within seven (7) additional calendar days. The G-AppConductCT specifies that the immediate reporting period is within 24 hours. Further, the report should include an assessment of the importance and implication of the findings, including relevant previous experience with the same or similar products. All deaths during the study, including the post-treatment, follow-up period, and deaths that resulted from a process that began during the study, should be reported.

Per the G-ReptSafetyData and the G-AppConductCT, all other SAEs and SUSARs that are not fatal or life-threatening must be filed as soon as possible but no later than 14 calendar days after first knowledge by the sponsor. Please note that the CT-Regs states that non-life-threatening SUSARs should be reported in 15 days.

See the CT-Regs and the G-ReptSafetyData for detailed reporting requirements.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

As per the G-ReptSafetyData and the G-AppConductCT, all SAEs/SADRs and SUSARs must be reported on the protocol-approved CRF/reporting form, or CIOMS Form I (TZA-7), and should include trial specific details such as participants’ ID numbers and/or protocol number. The form must be submitted to the TMDA office by courier, mail, email (as an attachment), or by fax.

According to TZA-26, the TMDA address and contact information is as follows:

P.O. Box 1253, Dodoma or P.O. Box 77150, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania
Telephone: +255 22 262961989 / 262961990
Fax: +255 22 2450793
Email: info@tmda.go.tz

See Annex 15 of the G-AppConductCT and Appendix 1 of the G-ReptSafetyData for the reporting forms.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

As delineated in the G-AppConductCT, the sponsor or the principal investigator (PI) must submit progress reports to the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) on a six (6)-month basis from the date of the clinical trial’s commencement. The content should be as prescribed in TZA-11. In addition, the TMDA provides a six (6)-month progress report form for clinical trials of investigational products (TZA-3). The CT-Regs states that progress reports should be submitted annually, or more frequently, as required by the TMDA.

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, researchers must submit progress reports to the ethics committee (EC). The investigator must ensure appropriate and timely feedback on the research process including progress reports at regular intervals as stipulated by the EC. Periodic progress reports enable the EC to determine whether the research study is progressing according to the approved protocol.

According to TZA-5, the investigator must submit written progress reports every six (6) months to the National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC) for all ongoing approved health research activities in Tanzania.

In addition, per the G-ResearchClearance, the PI is required to submit annual progress reports (as part of the annual permit-renewal process) to the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH) that include the title of the study, COSTECH registration reference number, study site, brief background and objective of the study, progress in the reporting period, any problems encountered, and implementation plan for the next period.

Final Report

The G-AppConductCT requires the sponsor or the PI to submit a closing report to the TMDA within 60 days of the trial’s completion. This report should be followed by a final study report within six (6) months after trial closure unless otherwise justified. The structure and content of the final report should comply with TZA-11.

In addition, per TZA-5, the PI is required to submit a final report to the NatHREC once the last participant has completed all visits and all adverse experiences have been brought to appropriate resolution. Final reports must be submitted to the NatHREC on a Close-out Form (Form 08 in TZA-5) and processed as an expedited review. The Secretariat will review the Close-out Form. The expedited reviewer will request additional information from the researcher, as needed. Written documentation acknowledging the closeout will be provided to the investigator and a copy retained in the proposal file. Further, the G-EthicsHR-TZA requires researchers to submit a final report to the institutional EC containing a summary of the study's key findings, recommendations, and conclusions.

The G-ResearchClearance requires the researcher to submit a soft and hardcopy of the final report to COSTECH. The report should be accompanied with any relevant publications, electronic raw data, and proof of dissemination if applicable. The final report should include:

COSTECH registration reference number
Title of study
Summary of report in English and Swahili
Brief background and objective of the study
Methodology, including study sites
Key findings
Constraints or problems encountered
Conclusions and recommendations
Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Per the CT-Regs and the G-AppConductCT, a sponsor is defined as an individual, company, institution, or organization which takes responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a clinical trial. The Tanzanian government also permits a sponsor to authorize a contract research organization (CRO) to perform one (1) or more of a sponsor’s trial-related duties and functions.

As required in the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the sponsor is responsible for providing all the necessary financial support for the initiation and completion of the research study. Additional sponsor responsibilities include developing the final study report; providing forms for safety monitoring and reporting; securing compensation or indemnity in the event of research-related injuries, disability, or death; and managing matters related to the investigational new drug.

The G-EthicsHR-TZA states that research may be externally sponsored, meaning that it is sponsored, financed, and sometimes wholly or partly carried out by an external organization with the collaboration or agreement of the appropriate authorities of the host community.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Overview

The Tanzanian government complies with the requirements delineated in the G-AppConductCT and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13) for conducting clinical trials. As set forth in TZA-13, the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical trial, and for ensuring that the investigator(s) are qualified by training and experience. Additionally, the sponsor must define and allocate all study related duties and responsibilities to the relevant parties participating in the study. As delineated in TZA-13 and the G-AppConductCT, prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s) and the institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and an investigator’s brochure. Furthermore, the sponsor must sign an agreement or contract with the participating institution(s).

The G-AppConductCT delineates that the principal investigator (PI) must have the following minimum qualifications and experience:

University degree in medicine, pharmacy, pharmacology, toxicology, or biochemistry and related fields
Practical experience within the relevant professional area
Previous experience as a co-investigator in at least two (2) trials in the relevant professional area
Must be responsible for the conduct of the clinical trial at a clinical trial site
Tanzanian resident
In good standing with a professional organization
For multicenter studies where the PI is not a resident of Tanzania, the appointed national PI must be a resident and should assume full responsibilities for all local clinical trial sites
Ensure that sufficient time is available to conduct and complete the trial, and that other commitments or trials do not divert essential subjects, resources, or facilities away from the trial in hand
The maximum number of clinical trials that a PI is allowed to supervise at the same time is five (5)
All investigators in a clinical trial, as well as the trial monitor, must have had formal training in Good Clinical Practices (GCPs) within the last three (3) years. Evidence of attending the GCP course should be submitted.

Per the G-AppConductCT, clinical trials must be carried out under conditions that ensure adequate safety for the participants. The site selected should be appropriate to the stage of development of the product and the potential risks involved. The trial site must have adequate facilities, including laboratories, equipment, and sufficient medical, paramedical, and clerical staff to support the trial and to deal with all reasonably foreseeable emergencies. All laboratory assays must be validated, and principles of Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) should be observed.

Per G-EthicsHR-TZA, institutions hosting research are overall accountable for research projects within their institutions. The institution must work closely with the investigators and monitor implementation of the research activities. Specifically, the host institution must ensure that they have qualified and competent investigators to carry out the research studies at the institution; facilitate the smooth implementation of research studies conducted at the institution; and take appropriate disciplinary action against investigators for non-compliance.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

The G-EthicsHR-TZA states that research may be externally sponsored. The ethical standards should not be less stringent than they would be for research carried out in the country of the sponsoring organization. Local ethics committees (ECs) are fully empowered to disapprove a study they believe is unethical.

The G-ResearchClearance requires all foreign researchers to identify and affiliate to a local institution that has the appropriate capacity in the relevant type of research and obtain a local collaborator. Minimum qualifications of the local collaborator should be a person with a master’s degree and an expert in the relevant field of study. There should be a memorandum of agreement between the local institution/collaborator and the foreign researcher that includes methods for sharing data, material transfer agreements, access benefit sharing agreements, managing intellectual property, and dissemination of research results.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, all Phase I, II, and III clinical trials, including drug efficacy trials, conducted in Tanzania must have a safety monitoring plan and Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) or a Data Monitoring Committee (DMC). Other interventional studies, such as community trials, may be required to set up DSMBs on a case-by-case basis. The National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC) must ensure the establishment of a DSMB in all clinical trials to periodically assess the progress of implementation of safety data and the efficacy endpoints and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or terminate a trial. See the G-EthicsHR-TZA for details on the DSMB composition, qualifications, affiliation, terms of reference, and reporting.

As delineated in TZA-5, NatHREC considers DSMBs to be relevant in the following kind of studies:

Controlled studies with mortality and/or severe morbidity as a primary or secondary endpoint
Randomized controlled studies focused on evaluating the clinical efficacy and safety of a new intervention
Early studies of a high-risk intervention
Studies in the early phases of a novel intervention with very limited information on clinical safety
Studies where the design or expected data accrual is complex, particularly studies with a long duration
Studies carried out in emergency situations
The CT-Regs states that the DSMB requirement may depend on trial design and scientific background, risk and benefit assessment, or any other reasons determined by the NatHREC.

TZA-5 states that for clinical trials conducted only in Tanzania, the DSMB must include representation from Tanzania. For multi-country clinical trials, the DSMB must include regional representation, and a Tanzanian must be among the members. Where necessary, NatHREC may request that the sponsor submit the most recent report from the DSMB. In contrast, per TZA-1, for clinical trials that require a DSMB, the PI must submit a list of DSMB members, including at least one (1) Tanzanian, to the National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR). Additionally, the CT-Regs requires the following information:

Trial objectives and terms of reference
Member composition, qualifications, specific roles, and relationship to the investigators and study
How meetings will be organized
The G-AppConductCT also specifies that a DSMB/DMC is required in situations where safety concerns may be unusually high. A DMC is recommended for any controlled trial of any size that will compare rates of mortality or major morbidity. It also indicates that a DSMB or DMC must be considered in the following situations:

The study endpoint is such that a highly favorable or unfavorable result, or even a finding of futility, at an interim analysis might ethically require termination of the study before its planned completion
There are a priori reasons for a particular safety concern (e.g., if the procedure for administering the treatment is particularly invasive)
There is prior information suggesting the possibility of serious toxicity with the study treatment
The study is being performed in a potentially fragile population such as children, pregnant women, the very elderly, other vulnerable populations, or those who are terminally ill or of diminished mental capacity
The study is being performed in a population at elevated risk of death or other serious outcomes, even when the study objective addresses a lesser endpoint
The study is large, of long duration, and multi-center
Additional details on the procedures and composition of the DSMB or DMC are provided in the G-AppConductCT and Part VIII of the CT-Regs. In addition, per the G-ReptSafetyData, the sponsor must also ensure that the DSMB’s interim safety data analyses are submitted to the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA).

Multicenter Studies

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, for multicenter studies, the study must be conducted in a methodologically identical way at each center. See the Scope of Review section for more details on multicenter studies.

As delineated in TZA-13, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor, and, if required, by the TMDA, and given ethics committee (EC) approval
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication between investigators is facilitated
The CT-Regs and the G-AppConductCT also state that in the case of multicenter studies where the PI is foreign, the appointed national PI must be a resident and assume full responsibilities for all local clinical trial sites.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Insurance

As set forth in the CT-Regs, the G-AppConductCT, the G-CTInsurance-TZA, and TZA-5, the sponsor or the designated contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for providing insurance coverage for any unforeseen injury to research participants. Before a clinical trial begins, the sponsor should also provide insurance and indemnify the investigator and the institution against claims arising from malpractice or negligence, and provide a copy of a valid insurance certificate from a recognized insurer in the clinical trial application submission. Additionally, per the CT-Regs, the insurance policy should be obtained from an insurance company registered in Tanzania. The G-CTInsurance-TZA and the G-AppConductCT state that details and proof of insurance must be provided in the ethics review submission. Furthermore, per the CT-Regs, for investigator-initiated trials, proof of current malpractice insurance that covers clinical trials must be provided to the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA). (See the Submission Content section for additional submission requirements.) The G-EthicsHR-TZA requires that insurance issues are clearly described in all clinical trial protocols, and that sponsors and investigators comply with the G-CTInsurance-TZA.

As per the CT-Regs and the G-CTInsurance-TZA, the sponsor or the designated CRO must sign an indemnity agreement with the host institution and the investigator(s) to cover any risks related to a research participant being injured by an investigational product, or from any procedure deemed necessary by the protocol. The sponsor and the institution’s chief executive officer must sign the indemnity. See Appendix 1 of the G-CTInsurance-TZA for a sample agreement. Per the CT-Regs, the sponsor must also indemnify the investigator against claims arising from the trial, except for claims that arise from malpractice or negligence.

The G-CTInsurance-TZA states that the insurance policy must meet the following requirements:

Cover the conduct of the relevant clinical trial in Tanzania
Provide a policy registered by the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority (TIRA)
Contain insurance coverage for an amount sufficient to meet the indemnification requirements applicable to the ethics committee (EC)-specified level of risk
Cover claims made by research participants during the trial as well as those made after the trial is completed
Compensation

Injury or Death

As specified in the G-CTInsurance-TZA and the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the sponsor or the designated CRO is responsible for providing compensation to research participants and/or their legal heirs in the event of trial-related injuries or death. The sponsor must also ensure that participants who suffer any trial-related injuries are provided with free medical treatment for such injuries. The G-EthicsHR-TZA states that research study participants must not be asked to waive the right to compensation and must retain the legal rights to seek monetary compensation for research-related injuries including settlements out of court, in accordance with applicable laws in Tanzania.

Per TZA-5, investigator(s) must ensure participants (or their dependents in case of participant death) are equitably compensated should they sustain unexpected serious injuries (physical, psychological, or social harm) that are judged to be related to the investigational product (IP) or study procedure. Participants must not be compensated if they sustain expected adverse events or those related to other licensed medicines appropriately prescribed during the trial.

As per the G-CTInsurance-TZA, the amount of compensation paid should be appropriate to the nature, severity, and persistence of the injury. Compensation should be abated, or in certain circumstances excluded, in light of the following factors (which will depend on the risk level the participant can reasonably be expected to accept):

The seriousness of the disease being treated
The degree of probability that adverse reactions will occur and any warning given
The risks and benefits of the established treatments relative to those known or suspected of the trial medicines
Trial Participation

As per the CT-Regs and the G-AppConductCT, participants may also be compensated for travel and incidental expenses incurred while participating in the trial. Per the G-AppConductCT, the clinical trial application must indicate the compensation to be received by participants, including a breakdown of costs.

The G-EthicsHR-TZA indicates that research study participants may be reimbursed for lost earnings, travel costs, lunch, and other expenses incurred in taking part in a study; they may also receive free medical services. Research participants, particularly those who receive no direct benefit from the research, will be compensated for inconvenience and time spent. Compensation must not be so large as to induce potential participants to consent to participate in the research study against their better judgement (undue inducement). A local EC must approve reimbursement and compensation for research study participants. Incentives to research study participants for their participation in research studies must not be considered a research benefit, but a recruitment incentive, and should not present undue influence on potential research participants.

Post-Trial Access

Per the study protocol template in the G-AppConductCT and TZA-42, details on post-trial access to products must be provided in the study protocol.

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, where appropriate, the clinical trial protocol should include a provision for the involvement of the community in the research process including the post-research period. The community in this context may be geographical or the study population. Further, there should be optimization of collateral benefits to the research communities including access to the products of the research. If the investigational product is found to be beneficial, the investigator should assist to secure its provision, without charge, to participants in the research study following the conclusion of the study.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As stated in the CT-Regs and the G-AppConductCT, the Tanzanian government complies with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13) requirement that the sponsor implement and maintain quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol. Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the investigator is responsible for documenting all steps in data management to allow a step-by-step retrospective assessment of the quality of the data and the performance of the research study.

Per G-EthicsHR-TZA, during the conduct of clinical trials, deviations from the original study might occur, such as changes in the sample size or analysis of the data as described in the protocol. Deviations must be reported to ethics committees (ECs). In the case of permanent deviations, researchers may write an amendment. The EC must decide whether a deviation is accidental or purposeful. Protocol violations are deviations from the original protocol that significantly affect the rights or interests of research participants and the scientific validity of the data. In the case of protocol violations, study participants must be informed and provisions made to protect their safety and welfare. ECs may halt the continuation of a previously approved protocol if they find protocol violations or other misconduct. Any serious or continuing non-compliance with ethical standards in the conduct of previously approved research projects must be reported to the sponsor and institutional or governmental authorities by the study’s principal investigator (PI) and the Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB).

Per TZA-13, the sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, focusing on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that includes:

Identifying processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results during protocol development
Identifying risks to critical trial processes and data
Evaluating the identified risks, against existing risk controls
Deciding which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept
Documenting quality management activities and communicating to those involved in or affected by these activities
Periodically reviewing risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant
Describing the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarize important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken in the clinical study report
The G-AppConductCT states that the sponsor should ensure that the protocol or other written agreement specifies that the investigator(s)/institution(s) will permit Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) inspection(s) and provide direct access to source data/documents. Further, TZA-13 indicates that the sponsor is responsible for obtaining agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. QC should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been correctly processed.

As described in the G-AppConductCT, study design, statistical considerations, choice of control groups, reporting of data, and conduct of the trial should also comply with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Efficacy Guidelines (E3-E16), provided in TZA-24.

Monitoring Requirements

As part of its QA system, the G-AppConductCT and TZA-13 note that the sponsor should ensure the trial is monitored and audited. The purpose of the audit should be to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, TZA-13, and other applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor should appoint auditors to review the clinical trial, ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience, and document their qualifications. The sponsor must also ensure that the audit is conducted in accordance with any custom SOPs, the auditor observations are documented, and data are available as needed for the TMDA. No specific timeframe is provided for the audit process. The sponsor should develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The extent and nature of monitoring is flexible and permits varied approaches that improve effectiveness and efficiency. The sponsor may choose on-site monitoring, a combination of on-site and centralized monitoring, or where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan).

The G-GCPInspections provides guidance on clinical trial inspections to ensure the trial is conducted in accordance with the study protocol, procedures, TZA-13, and regulatory requirements, and that the data are accurate and valid. Inspectees (i.e., sponsor, investigator site, and contract research organization) should follow the G-GCPInspections requirements to ensure consistent conduct of trial inspections, including uniform reporting.

Per Pub-Rpts, to promote transparency of clinical trial oversight in the country, the TMDA will publish to its website clinical trial public assessment reports (CTPAR) and clinical trial public inspection reports (CTPIR) of all approved and ongoing clinical trials on an annual basis. The publication will only be undertaken after obtaining the consent of the respective PIs and sponsors. The PIs and sponsors are required to provide their consent within 14 days from the TMDA’s notification letter. Failure to respond is assumed to mean that the PIs and sponsors have consented to the publication of the CTPAR and CTPIR. For further clarification on this notice, contact TMDA at clinicaltrials@tmda.go.tz or info@tmda.go.tz.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

The CT-Regs and the G-AppConductCT state that if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the PI or the sponsor must inform the TMDA no later than 15 days after the date of the termination, and explain the reason(s) for the termination and its impact on the proposed or ongoing clinical trials. The sponsor or PI must also inform all co-investigators of the termination, the reasons for the termination, and advise them in writing of potential health risks to research participants. For each discontinued clinical trial site, the sponsor must stop the use or importation of the investigational product (IP) from the date of the trial’s discontinuation and take all reasonable measures to ensure the recovery of all unused quantities of the IP.

The G-EthicsHR-TZA also indicates that in the event of early termination of the research study, the investigator must inform, in writing, the appropriate EC, the National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR), the TMDA, and the research sponsor of the early termination and the underlying reason for such termination. Per TZA-5, the National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC) should be notified if the investigator chooses to suspend the study. To resume a suspended study regardless of who initiated the suspension, the PI must submit a request to the Medical Research Coordination Committee (MRCC) with a report on the progress of addressing corrective actions. Research studies may be terminated based on the recommendation of the NatHREC, zonal or institutional ECs, DSMB, study sponsor, PI, or regulatory authority. In addition, a research study can be terminated due to an arising conflict of interest among investigators or financial misuse, which negatively affects implementation of the research project.

According to TZA-13, if it is discovered that noncompliance significantly affects or has the potential to significantly affect participant protection or reliability of trial results, the sponsor should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions. Further, the EC should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

As stated in the CT-Regs and the G-AppConductCT, the Tanzanian government complies with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13). As per TZA-13, when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor must ensure that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. Per TZA-13, the sponsor should base their approach to validate such systems on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use and the potential of the system to affect participant protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, the sponsor should maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) for the systems that cover system setup, installation, and use. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the system users should be provided with training. Refer to TZA-13 for additional information.

Records Management

The CT-Regs states that the investigator and the sponsor must retain all trial-related records, documents, and information at the trial site for a period not less than 20 years following the trial’s completion. Further, documentation should be retained for at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed. See the CT-Regs for detailed record retention requirements. As set forth in TZA-13, all sponsor-specific essential documents used in the trial should be retained for at least two (2) years after formal discontinuation of the trial.

In addition, TZA-13 states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Responsible Parties

For the purposes of data protection requirements, PDP-Act delineates that the “data controller” (i.e., the natural/legal person or public body designated by law) is responsible for determining the purpose and means of processing personal data. The "data processor" processes personal data on behalf of the data controller. The “data protection officer” is an individual appointed by the data controller or data processor to ensure compliance with the PDP-Act and its regulations. Data controllers and processors must be registered with the Personal Data Protection Commission (PDPC). See the PDP-Reg-TZA for detailed procedures on registering with PDPC.

Data Protection

Per the PDP-Act, the data controller or data processor must protect personal data by ensuring that it is:

Processed lawfully, fairly, and transparently
Collected for explicit, specified, and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a manner incompatible with those purposes
Adequate, relevant, and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which it is processed
Accurate and where necessary, kept up to date, with every reasonable step taken to ensure that any inaccurate personal data is erased or rectified without delay
Stored in a form which permits identification of data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposes for which the personal data is processed
Processed in accordance with the rights of a data subject
Processed in a manner that ensures appropriate security of the personal data, including protection against unauthorized or unlawful processing and against any loss, destruction, or damage
Not transferred abroad contrary to the provisions of the PDP-Act
Regarding transborder data flow, the PDP-Act prohibits the transfer of personal data outside of Tanzania except under the following circumstances:

If the data is transferred to a country that also has a data protection law enacted
If the country does not have a data protection law, data may only be transferred outside of Tanzania based on several factors, including the recipient state's federal legal frameworks, security and privacy principles, the type of information being shared, the data transfer mechanisms in place, the specific reason for the transfer, and the proposed length of data processing (See the PDP-Act for more details)
See the PDP-Reg-TZA for detailed implementation requirements.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

Per the PDP-Act, before collecting data, a data controller must ensure that the data subject is aware of the purposes for which the personal data is collected; the fact that collection of the personal data is for authorized purposes; and any intended recipients of the personal data. However, the data controller is not required to inform the data subject if the personal data is publicly available, the data subject concerned authorizes the collection of the personal data from a third party, compliance is not reasonably practicable in the circumstances of the particular case, non-compliance is necessary per other written laws, or compliance would prejudice the lawful purpose of the collection.

As required in the PDP-Act, sensitive personal data must not be processed without obtaining prior written consent of the data subject, which may be withdrawn by the data subject at any time and without any explanation or charges. If the data subject is a minor, a person of unsound mind, or any other person unable to consent, such person’s consent must be obtained or sought from the legal representative(s)/guardian(s). Exceptions to this rule apply where the processing is necessary in these circumstances:

Compliance with other written laws
To protect the vital interests of the data subject or of another person, where the data subject is incapable of giving consent or is not represented by a legal representative
Necessary for the institution, trial, or defense of legal claims
Relates to personal data that has been made public by the data subject
The purposes of scientific research and the PDPC has, by special guidelines, specified the circumstances under which such processing may be carried out
For the purposes of medical reasons in the interest of the data subject and the sensitive personal data concerned is processed under the supervision of a health professional in accordance with the law
Further, the PDP-Act delineates that data collected may only be disclosed if the data subject has consented to such disclosure and if the disclosure is authorized or required by law, directly related to the purpose for which such data was collected, and/or would preserve health or reduce harm to another person or the society. Disclosure of information may also be permitted where the data subject is not identified for statistical or research purposes and where it is guaranteed that such data will not be published in a manner that will identify the data subject. Additionally, data collectors must establish a code of ethics for personal data protection during collection or processing of personal data, and they must maintain a proper security system.

Per the PDP-Reg-TZA, the rights of participants regarding their personal data are the autonomous right to control their personal data, the right to communicate and exercise their data rights, and the right to human intervention to minimize biases that automated processes may create. In addition, per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, researchers using online and digital tools must protect the individual’s right to privacy and confidentiality including whether they knew or were expected to know that records and data were being kept. If individuals have reasonable expectations of privacy and impermanence of their online activities, then researchers may need to take specific measures to inform the respondents and obtain their consent to use their data for research. Further, if studies use artificial intelligence, the participant’s “right to be forgotten” must be protected by enabling their ability to request that a search engine remove information about them.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Tanzanian clinical trials, a freely given informed consent must be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the CT-Regs, the G-AppConductCT, and the G-EthicsHR-TZA. As per the G-AppConductCT and the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by the national ethics committee (EC), the National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC), and provided to the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) for approval with the clinical trial application. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.)

The G-AppConductCT and the G-EthicsHR-TZA state that the investigator, or the designated representative, must provide detailed research study information to the participant or the legal representative/guardian. The G-AppConductCT, the G-EthicsHR-TZA, and TZA-5 also specify that the oral and written information concerning the trial, including the ICF, should be easy to understand and presented without coercion or unduly influencing a potential participant to enroll in the clinical trial. The participant and the legal representative/guardian, should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate. The G-EthicsHR-TZA indicates that informed consent protects the individual’s freedom of choice and respects the individual’s autonomy. The consent process should be a flow of information exchange between the researcher and research participants during the whole research process. The information provided should be adequate, and clearly understood by the research participants. Seeking consent must be carried out under circumstances that provide the prospective research participant or the representative sufficient opportunity to consider whether to participate and minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence. The information given to the research participant or the representative, whether it is conveyed orally, in writing, or another delivery mechanism, must be in a language and form understandable to the participant or the legal representative/guardian.

As per the G-AppConductCT and the G-EthicsHR-TZA, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or the legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive their legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representatives from their liabilities for any negligence.

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, for verbal consent, the procedures used to obtain consent must be described within the ethics application, and the verbal consent must still contain all of the elements required for informed consent.

Re-Consent

According to G-AppConductCT, any change in the ICF due to a protocol modification or an alteration in treatment modality, procedures, or site visits, should be approved by the NatHREC and the TMDA prior to implementing any changes. The participant or the legal representative/guardian should also be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial. The communication of this information should be documented.

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the investigator must ensure that there is continued adequacy of the informed consent process and renewal of informed consent if there are significant changes in the conditions or procedures of the research project or if new information becomes available that could affect the research participant’s willingness to continue in the research project.

Regarding secondary use of materials or data in databases, registries, and repositories, the G-EthicsHR-TZA states that in the absence of broad consent to future use of material or data, including images, for research purposes, the following is recommended:

The nature of the previously obtained consent should be determined to ascertain whether subsequent usage was envisaged and whether it falls within the scope of the current protocol. If so, new consent is not required
If the scope of the current protocol is different, then new consent may be required
If samples are anonymous and the results of research would not place any individual, family, or community at social, psychological, legal, or economic risk of harm, then new consent is not required
If the link to identifiers exists but is not provided to the research team and the results of research will not place any individual, family, or community at social, psychological, legal, or economic risk of harm, then new consent is not required. The person who holds the code or link should sign an explicit written agreement not to release the identifiers to the research team. This agreement should be submitted to the EC
If the samples can be linked to identifiers, the EC must decide on a case-by-case basis whether expedited or full review is necessary
Language Requirements

As stated in the G-AppConductCT, the ICF content should be presented in both English and Kiswahili, and all information given to participants, both oral and written, must be in both English and Kiswahili.

Documenting Consent

The G-AppConductCT and the G-EthicsHR-TZA state that the participant or the legal representative/guardian, and the person who conducted the informed consent discussion must sign and date the ICF. Where the participant is illiterate and/or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, verbal consent should be obtained in the presence of and countersigned by an impartial witness. Before participating in the study, the participant should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF, and any other written information provided during the informed consent process. The G-AppConductCT states that the participant or the legal representative/guardian should also receive a copy of any updates to the signed and dated ICF, and copies of any amendments to the written information originally provided.

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the study participant may imply consent by voluntary actions (e.g., express consent verbally or sign (written consent form)). A verbal or oral consent process is where the researcher and participant have a conversation to give information and obtain consent. Usually, oral consent is used when it is not possible to get written consent. The verbal consent may be deemed appropriate and applied under the following situations where:

The study is deemed to be of minimal risk
There are cultural or political concerns with signing contract-like documents
The researcher and or participants could be put at risk by the existence of a paper record
The study is conducted remotely via video conferencing software, telephone, etc.
It may not be feasible in large information-taking settings (e.g., some focus group discussions (FGDs)); however, documentation of verbal consent for participants in FGDs must be written down to include the names of participants who consented verbally and those that did not
Waiver of Consent

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, for research that is no more than minimal risk, the EC may approve a request to waive some or all of the required elements of informed consent under specific circumstances. Waivers of informed consent are primarily requested for projects involving the secondary analysis of existing data. To waive or alter informed consent elements, the following conditions must be met:

The study could not practicably be carried out without the waiver or alteration (whenever appropriate the study participants will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation)
In situations where deception needs to be applied to achieve the objectives of the study
The only record linking the study participant and the study would be the consent document and the principal risk to the research participant would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality
The study participant presents in an emergency situation and informed consent cannot be reasonably obtained (See the Emergencies section for more information)
The G-EthicsHR-TZA states that if a waiver of written informed consent is granted by the EC, then each study participant should be asked whether they wish to have documentation that links them with the study; and the participant’s wishes must govern.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Based on the G-AppConductCT and the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable. (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study purpose, procedures, and duration
Approximate number of participants involved in the trial
Experimental aspects of the study
The participant’s responsibilities in participating in the trial
Expected risks or discomforts to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
Disclosure of alternate procedures or treatments available to participants
Clinical trial treatment schedule(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
Benefits or prorated payment to the participant or others reasonably expected from the research; if no benefit is expected, the participant should be made aware of this
Compensation and/or treatment available for the participant in the case of trial-related injury, with a description of such compensation/treatment and where further information may be obtained
Participation is voluntary, and that the participant can withdraw from the study at any time without penalty or loss of benefits, including medical treatment, to which the participant is otherwise entitled
A statement of the extent of the investigator’s responsibility, where applicable, to provide medical services to the study participant
A statement of the nature, form, and extent of compensation for study participation (e.g., reimbursement for transport, time, and meals)
A brief description of the research project sponsors and the investigators’ institutional affiliation
Extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained, and the possibility of record access by the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA)
The participant or the legal representative/guardian will be notified in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the course of the study which may affect the participant’s willingness to continue
Individuals to contact for further information regarding the trial, the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury; these contacts must speak the participant’s language
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without consent
Consequences of a participant’s decision to withdraw from the research, and procedures for orderly withdrawal by the participant
A statement that study participants will get feedback on findings and the progress of the study and that any new information that affects the study or data that has clinical relevance to the participants will be made available to the participants or their health care providers
Where necessary (e.g., illiterate, mentally incapacitated, or physically disabled study participants), the provision for a witness at appropriate stages of the informed consent process should be ensured
A statement that the study has been approved by a recognized Tanzanian-based ethics committee (EC)
Whether, when, and how any of the products or interventions proven by the study to be safe and effective will be made available to the study participants at the end of the study and whether they will be expected to pay for them
With regard to research involving the collection of biological/genetic materials, an explanation should be provided on how specimens will be managed at the end of the study; if the samples are stored for future use, separate consent should be obtained
Additional costs to the participant that may result from participation in the research
Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, for protocols involving verbal consent, the following minimum information must be communicated to the participant:

Introduction - who is the caller/interviewer, affiliation, organization
A statement that the study involves research
Study purpose
What the participant will be asked to do and the time commitment
Any compensation and any information to be collected to make that payment (mailing address, email address, etc.)
The voluntary nature of participation in the study
Any risks or benefits associated with participating (leave this out if there are none)
That notes are being taken or data is being recorded, if applicable
Whether the information collected will remain confidential or if it is planned to keep identifiers with the research data
Contact information for the researcher and/or the EC
Ask if the participant has any questions
Ask explicitly, “Do you agree to participate in this study?”
Depending on the nature of the study and the participant pool, the researcher may offer other pertinent information to ensure that participants are fully informed about the study and any risks or benefits from participating in it
Compensation Disclosure

Regarding compensation, TZA-5 states that investigator(s) must ensure participants are aware of the compensation guidelines and that their rights regarding compensation are protected. Participants must not be asked to waive their rights to free treatment or compensation for research-related harms, nor must they be required to show negligence or lack of a reasonable degree of skill on the part of the researcher to claim free treatment or compensation. The informed consent process or form must not contain statements that would absolve a researcher from responsibility in the case of harm, or that would imply that participants waive their right to seek compensation.

See the Vulnerable Populations and Consent for Specimen sections for further information.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Overview

As stated in the G-AppConductCT, the Tanzanian government complies with the ethical principles set forth in the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13) and the Declaration of Helsinki (TZA-30), which promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. A participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process. (See the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.)

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the G-AppConductCT and the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As delineated in the G-AppConductCT and the G-EthicsHR-TZA, a potential research participant or the legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.) The G-EthicsHR-TZA states that information about the research study must be communicated in understandable and legally accepted language and format, and in a conducive environment, at all stages of the research.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per the G-AppConductCT and the G-EthicsHR-TZA, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The G-AppConductCT and the G-EthicsHR-TZA state that the research participant or the legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries. (See the Required Elements section for more detailed information regarding participant rights.)

The Right to Safety and Welfare

As specified in the CT-Regs, the G-EthicsHR-TZA, and the G-AppConductCT, the Tanzanian government complies with the principles in TZA-13 that state a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of the participant’s health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
As per the G-AppConductCT, in an emergency, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) cannot be obtained from the research participant, the consent of the legal representative/guardian should be obtained. If prior consent from the participant or the legal representative/guardian cannot be obtained, participant enrollment should require measures described in the protocol and/or elsewhere. Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) approval should also be obtained in order to protect the participant’s rights, safety, and well-being and to ensure compliance with National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC) and TMDA requirements. The participant or the legal representative/guardian should provide consent as soon as possible.

In addition, per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, an EC may approve a waiver of consent if the study participant presents in an emergency situation and informed consent cannot be reasonably obtained from the participant or the legal representative/guardian. During a public health emergency of national and international concern, some of the activities focusing on diseases or events threatening national and international health security are considered non-research and need immediate attention. Informed consent may not be required in non-research activities.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Overview

As per the G-AppConductCT and the G-EthicsHR-TZA, in all Tanzanian clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. Vulnerable populations include those who are incapable of protecting their own interests due to a lack of autonomy, intelligence, education, resources, strength, or other necessary attributes, and have an increased likelihood of being wronged or of incurring additional harm during clinical trials. For example, the G-AppConductCT includes persons who are illiterate, marginalized by their social status or behavior, or living in an authoritarian environment. Vulnerable groups include individuals in hierarchical relationships, institutionalized persons, nomads, refugees or displaced persons, people living with disabilities, people with incurable or stigmatized conditions or diseases, and people faced with physical frailty. The G-EthicsHR-TZA additionally identifies children, mature and emancipated minors, street children, prisoners, the homeless, substance abusers, handicapped (mentally and physically), armed forces, and pregnant women. In some cases, willingness to volunteer to participate in research is unduly influenced by the expectation of benefits associated with their participation, or fear of retaliation from interested senior members of the hierarchy in case of refusal to participate. Characteristics that constitute vulnerability with reference to communities include one (1) or more of the following:

Limited economic empowerment
Inadequate protection of human rights
Discrimination on the basis of health status
Inadequate understanding of scientific research
Limited availability of health care and treatment options
Limited ability in the community to provide informed consent
As per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, clinical trials involving vulnerable persons require additional attention to ensure their protection. Where factors relating to vulnerability are an aspect of the research study, ethics committees (ECs) must ensure that researchers specify how that vulnerability would be addressed, particularly:

Selection of the particular communities is justified by the research goals
Research study is relevant to the needs and priorities of the community in which it is to be conducted
Research study is beneficial to that community
The community can access products of the research
Where appropriate, feedback of results should be provided to the community
Study participants must be fully aware that they are participating in the research and should provide informed consent
Special attention should be paid to the content, language of the consent document, procedures for obtaining informed consent, monitoring of the process, and testing comprehension
TZA-5 requires the investigator to specify in the clinical trial application if a research protocol involves a vulnerable population or special group, provide adequate justification for their involvement, and provide information on how the participants’ rights and welfare will be safeguarded. Further, the investigator should include information about how they will assess the participants’ capacity to consent for themselves. If the participant is not able to consent, the researcher should include information about how consent will be obtained from the participant’s legal representative/guardian and how assent will be obtained from the participant (where appropriate).

See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Information on the specific vulnerable populations specified in the G-EthicsHR-TZA is provided below.

Persons Highly Dependent on Medical Care

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, persons highly dependent on medical care, such as those living with disabilities (physical or mental) or terminally ill patients, require special attention because they are prone to being socially marginalized. Therefore, their dignity, rights, and well-being in research must be respected. For persons living with disabilities, careful consideration should be made where proxy consent is used, and where the use of signed consent forms is not feasible, alternative viable methods should be employed. Persons living with disabilities should not be unfairly excluded from participating in research. Researchers should make efforts to address communication, disability, and comprehension constraints. (See Mentally Impaired section for requirements on persons with mental disabilities). For terminally ill patients, their dire state may affect their ability to make voluntary decisions regarding participation in research studies. A research protocol involving terminally ill patients as study participants must meet the following additional requirements: the research can only be conducted with terminally ill patients; if the research objectives of the study cannot be addressed using another non-vulnerable group; and the risk-benefit ratio should be favorable to the patients.

Elderly Persons

As per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, it is important to exercise special care when involving the elderly who have been in the hospital or in a residential home for a long time because they may be more dependent on others for their care. Independent, but caring observer(s) for the elderly must be fully informed about the study and be satisfied that the elderly participant understands the intended research activities prior to consent.

As per the G-AppConductCT, TZA-14 should be followed for clinical trials that involve:

New investigational products that are likely to have significant use in the elderly
New formulations and new combinations of established medicinal products when there is specific reason to expect that conditions common in the elderly are likely to be encountered and are not already dealt with in current labeling
New formulation or new combination is likely to alter the geriatric patient’s response in a way different from previous formulations
New uses that have significant potential applicability to the elderly
Students

The G-EthicsHR-TZA states that research studies involving students can be conducted as long as the following conditions are met:

The tutor involved in the tuition of the student should not be involved in the recruitment and other negotiations on the terms and research conditions
The informed consent should clearly state that the student may wish at any stage of the research study to withdraw without any undue consequences
An impression should not be created that acceptance to participate in the study will benefit the student in the passing of their examinations
An impression should not be created that non-acceptance will result in discrimination and consequences on the student’s studies
There should not be any form of coercion, pressure, or financial inducement other than that proposed as reimbursements for participants
Homeless Persons

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the category of homeless persons includes street children, adults staying on the street, refugees, and internally displaced persons. In conducting research with people who are homeless, researchers should be guided by the following principles:

Research must be conducted with respect to the human rights, welfare, and dignity of study participants
The research study must be conducted in a non-judgmental way regarding the person’s appearance, strategies for making money, or personal habits
The right to privacy and security must be respected at all times for people who are homeless
Armed Forces

For research involving participants in the armed forces, the G-EthicsHR-TZA requires the following consent conditions:

Any possible advantages accruing to participants through their participation in the research study (when compared to the general living conditions, medical care, quality of food, amenities, and opportunity for earnings) are not of such magnitude so that it might impair participants’ ability to weigh the risks of the study against the value of these advantages in the military environment
The risks involved in the research study are commensurate with the risks that would be accepted by non-armed force volunteer participants
Procedures for the selection of study participants from within the military are fair to all military personnel and insulated from arbitrary intervention by military authorities or by other members of the armed forces
The information conveyed to the participants is presented in a language that is understandable to them
There is adequate assurance that a participant’s participation or refusal to participate in the study will not be considered in decisions regarding their promotion, pay, or any other career opportunities
Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
The ChildAct states that a person less than 18 years of age should be known as a child. As per the G-AppConductCT and the G-EthicsHR-TZA, when the research participant is a child, the informed consent form (ICF) must be signed by the child’s parent/legal guardian.

According to the G-EthicsHR-TZA, research involving greater than minimal risk, but presenting the prospect of direct benefit to a child, may be conducted only if:

The risk is justified by the anticipated benefit to the child
The relation of the anticipated benefit to the risk is at least as favorable to the research study participants (children) as that presented by available alternative approaches
Adequate provisions have been made for the solicitation of the child’s assent and the informed consent of the child’s parent/legal guardian
Further, per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, research that involves greater than minimal risk and entails no prospect of direct benefit to the individual child participant, but is likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the child’s disorder or condition may not be conducted unless:

The risk represents a minor increase over minimal risk
The intervention or procedure presents experiences that are commensurate with those inherent in their actual or expected medical, dental, psychological, social, or educational situations
The intervention or procedure is likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the child’s disorder or condition that is of vital importance for the understanding or amelioration of that disorder or condition
Adequate provisions have been made for the solicitation of the child’s assent and their parents’/legal guardians’ informed consent
When the child’s participation is indispensable and participation is not contrary to the child’s best interest
As delineated in the G-EthicsHR-TZA, mature minors are individuals 14 to 17 years of age who are able to demonstrate the ability and capacity to manage their own affairs and to live wholly or partially independent of their parent/legal guardian. This is someone who has not reached adulthood (as defined by country law) but who may be treated as an adult for certain purposes (e.g., consenting to medical care). Emancipated minors refer to persons who have not reached the age of majority (18 years) and are empowered by law to make autonomous decisions. They are free from control by their parent/legal guardian, and the parent/legal guardian is free from the responsibility for the child. Mature and emancipated minors may independently provide informed consent to participate in research if:

In the ethics committee’s (EC’s) view, the research is not objectionable to parents/legal guardians in the community (established with evidence from the community)
The research protocol includes clear justification for targeting mature and emancipated minors as participants, and a clear justification for not involving parents/legal guardians in the consent process
The G-AppConductCT delineates that data on the appropriate use of investigational products (IPs) in the pediatric population should be generated unless its use in pediatric patients is clearly inappropriate. The pediatric development program should not delay completion of adult studies and availability of IPs for adults. The decision to proceed with a pediatric development program for an IP and the nature of that program should follow the requirements in TZA-12.

Assent Requirements

The G-EthicsHR-TZA, states that the child’s assent takes precedence over the parent’s/legal guardian’s consent. For all research involving children, there must be no financial or other inducements to participate for the parent, guardian, or child, although reimbursements and a token for the child after completion of the study may be acceptable.

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, children and adolescents who are minors cannot give legally-valid informed consent, but they may be able to give assent. To give assent means that the child or adolescent is meaningfully engaged in the research study discussion in accordance with their capacities. Assent must be considered as a process and is not merely the absence of dissent. Furthermore, the researcher must involve the child or adolescent in the actual decision-making process and use age-appropriate information. It is particularly important to inform the child or adolescent and obtain assent as described above, preferably in writing for children who are literate. Specific protections to safeguard children and adolescents’ rights and welfare in the study are necessary. Before undertaking research studies involving children and adolescents, the researcher and the ECs must ensure that:

A parent/legal guardian of the child or adolescent has given permission
Assent of the child or adolescent has been obtained, after having been provided with adequate information about the study tailored to the child’s or adolescent’s level of maturity
If children reach the legal age of maturity during the study period, their consent to continued participation should be obtained
Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, children or adolescents are required to assent if they are between 10 and 17 years old and can read and write, as well as understand the description of the study. In general, the refusal of a child or adolescent to participate or continue in the study must be respected unless, in exceptional circumstances, where participation is considered the best medical option. For research interventions or procedures that have the potential to benefit children or adolescents, the risks must be minimized and outweighed by the prospect of potential individual benefit. For research interventions or procedures that have no potential individual benefits for children/adolescents, the interventions should be studied in adults first, unless the necessary data cannot be obtained without participation of children/adolescents and the risks are minimized.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
The G-AppConductCT recommends that women of child-bearing potential be included at the earliest possible stages of clinical trial research so that potential sex-related differences are identified and taken into consideration when planning Phase III trials. The timing of including women of childbearing potential or pregnant women in clinical trials should comply with guidance in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals (TZA-15). Any research involving pregnant women should be individualized and based on a careful risk/benefit assessment, considering:

The nature and severity of the disease
The availability and results of previous nonclinical and clinical data
The availability of alternative therapy and knowledge about their risks
The stage of pregnancy in relation to the overall development of the fetus, especially regarding fetal brain development
The potential for harm to the woman, the fetus, or child
The long-term follow up of the pregnancy, fetus, and child, when possible
Additional considerations for including pregnant women in clinical trials are provided in the G-AppConductCT.

The G-AppConductCT identifies the following considerations for deciding whether to include breastfeeding women in clinical trials:

A new indication is being sought for an approved therapeutic product and there is evidence of use or anticipated use by breastfeeding women
After market authorization, use of a therapeutic product in breastfeeding women becomes evident
There is concern that the consequences of uninformed dosages for use while breastfeeding are potentially serious and/or severe
A therapeutic product is under review for market authorization and is expected to be used by women of reproductive age
The trial involves marketed medications that are commonly used by women of reproductive age
The risk to the infant or mother is not greater than that from established procedures routinely used during breastfeeding, is comparable to those being studied, and the purpose of the research is the development of biomedical knowledge which cannot be obtained by any other means
As per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, research studies relating to pregnant women or fetuses may be undertaken under the following conditions:

The risk to the fetus is minimal and is the least possible risk for achieving the objectives of the research study, except where the purpose of the research study is to meet the health needs of the mother and the fetus, and the foreseeable benefits outweigh the potential risks
No procedural changes that could cause greater than minimal risk to the fetus or to the pregnant woman may be introduced into the procedure for termination of the pregnancy
No inducements, whether financial or any other form, may be offered to terminate the pregnancy for the purposes of the research study
Appropriate studies on animals and non-pregnant individuals have been completed
The purpose of the proposed research is to meet the health needs of the mother and the fetus will be placed at risk to the minimum extent necessary to meet these needs or the risk to the fetus is minimal
The mother and the father are both legally competent and have been fully informed of the possible impact on the fetus and have given their informed consent to proceed; however, the father’s consent is not required if the purpose of the research is primarily to meet the health needs of the mother, the father’s identity and/or whereabouts are unknown, the father is not available, or the pregnancy resulted from rape or incest
Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
According to the G-EthicsHR-TZA, prisoners are vulnerable to abuse by research because their freedom for consent can easily be undermined, which could affect their ability to make a voluntary decision regarding their participation in research. Research involving prisoners may not be approved unless the proposed research has the intent and a reasonable probability of improving the health and well-being of the study participants, and appropriate knowledgeable persons in penology, medicine, and ethics have been consulted in the course of reviewing the research protocol. Further, research with prisoners can be conducted only if:

The research offers a distinctly favorable benefit to risk ratio, not because the prisoners are a convenient source of participants
The research improves the well-being of prisoners while taking great care to protect their health, well-being, and human rights
The ethics committee (EC) reviews and verifies that the criteria for permissible research are satisfied
EC members have no association with the prison(s) involved other than their status as members of the EC reviewing the proposed research study
Where possible, a prisoner or an ex-prisoner should be co-opted to the EC in reviewing the proposed research study
The risks involved in the research study are commensurate with risks that will be accepted by non-prisoner volunteers
The procedure for selecting participants in the prison are fair to all prisoners
There is adequate assurance that a prisoner’s participation or refusal to participate will not be considered in decisions regarding their release or further detention and each prisoner is clearly informed in advance that participation in the research study will have no effect on their release
Any possible advantages accruing to the prisoner through participation in the research study, when compared to the general living conditions, medical care, quality of food, amenities, and opportunity for earnings in the prison, are not of such magnitude that the prisoner’s ability to weigh the risks of the research against the value of these advantages in the prison environment is impaired
Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
As indicated in the G-EthicsHR-TZA, persons living with mental disabilities require special attention because they are prone to being socially marginalized, and therefore, their dignity, rights, and well-being in research must be respected. Careful consideration should be made where proxy consent is used. Where the use of signed consent forms is not feasible, alternative viable methods should be employed. Persons living with disabilities should not be unfairly excluded from participating in research. Researchers should make efforts to address communication, disability, and comprehension constraints. Persons with mental health conditions including psychiatric, cognitive, or developmental conditions, and substance abuse related disorders at times may be hospitalized or institutionalized, which may further compromise their ability to make voluntary decisions to participate in a research project. Research must not be conducted if the purpose of the research is not relevant to the particular health needs of persons living with disabilities, or alternative interventions exist that are at least as advantageous to the individual participant as that under the proposed study. Further, the following should be scrutinized:

There is sufficient justification for inclusion
There are appropriate evaluation procedures for ascertaining study participants’ ability to give informed consent; if such study participants are deemed unable to understand and to make an informed decision, then an appropriate proxy should be identified
An informed consent process that is free from coercion
Be of no more than minimal risk; if minimal risk is involved, the risk is outweighed by the anticipated benefits of the research study to the participants
The G-EthicsHR-TZA outlines the requirements to safeguard the rights and welfare of adults who are incapable of giving informed consent in research studies. Before undertaking research with adults who are not capable of giving informed consent, the researcher and the EC must ensure that:

A legal representative of the person who is incapable of giving informed consent has given permission and this permission takes account of the participant’s previously formed preferences and values (if any)
The assent of the participant has been obtained to the extent of that person’s capacity, after having been provided with adequate information about the study at the level of the participant’s capacity for understanding this information
If participants become capable of giving informed consent during the study, their consent to continued participation must be obtained; in general, a potential participant’s refusal to enroll in the study must be respected, unless in exceptional circumstances where study participation is considered the best available medical option for an individual who is incapable of giving informed consent
Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
As delineated in the G-AppConductCT, an investigational medicinal product (IP) is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. Further, per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, an IP refers to a preventative (vaccine), therapeutic (drug or biologic), device, diagnostic, or palliative used in a clinical trial. The G-AppConductCT and the G-EthicsHR-TZA state that an IP includes:

A product with a marketing authorization when it is used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form
When used for an unapproved indication
When used to gain further information about an approved use
Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Manufacturing

According to the TMMDAct, the CT-Regs, and the G-AppConductCT, the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) in Tanzania. The TMDA will approve the manufacture of an IP after the clinical trial application has been approved via the Regulatory Information Management System (RIMS) Customer Self Service Portal (TZA-34). Regarding inspection frequency, the GMP-Insp and TZA-19 state that a domestic manufacturing facility must be inspected once a year to renew its annual business permit. The GMP-Insp also states that a manufacturing facility must be inspected once every three (3) years. However, a facility may be inspected at any time when necessary. See the G-AppConductCT for details on the quality requirements for manufacturing IPs.

Per the GMP-Insp, domestic and foreign manufacturing facilities of human medicinal products must comply with the good manufacturing practice (GMP) in the latest versions of the World Health Organization (WHO)’s Technical Report Series (WHO-TRS). In addition, other guidelines—such as those by the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use and Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme—may be used as supplementary guidance when establishing compliance of facilities to GMP requirements. See the GMP-Insp for additional details and information on the inspection of manufacturing facilities of human medicinal products.

Import

Per the TMMDAct, the CT-Regs, the TFDCA-ImptExpt, the G-AppConductCT, and the G-ImpExp, the TMDA is also responsible for authorizing the import of IPs. As per the TMMDAct, the TFDCA-ImptExpt, and the G-ImpExp, the sponsor or the principal investigator (PI) may apply for an import license once the clinical trial application has been approved by the TMDA. The TFDCA-ImptExpt specifies that in order to be granted an import license, the applicant must:

Have a pharmacist registered by the Pharmacy Council who must be a Superintendent of the business
Have premises registered by the TMDA
Hold a valid business permit
The G-ImpExp states that importation of pharmaceutical products and raw materials must be done by importers whose premises are registered by the TMDA or the relevant government institutions. All importers should import pharmaceutical products and raw materials through authorized ports of entry. A person must not import any pharmaceutical product with a shelf life of more than 24 months whose remaining shelf life is less than 60%, or a pharmaceutical product with a shelf life of less than or equal to 24 months whose remaining shelf life is less than 80%.

The TFDCA-ImptExpt specifies that the import license application should be accompanied by the clinical trial approval letter issued by the TMDA. The applicant must fill out the Application for Importation of Pharmaceutical Products provided in the First Schedule of the TFDCA-ImptExpt and pay the fee pursuant to the TMMDAFees. In addition, the application should be accompanied by three (3) copies of the proforma invoice numbered, dated, and signed by the superintendent of the business. (A proforma invoice is an abridged or estimated invoice sent in advance of a shipment or delivery of goods.) The proforma invoice should include the following:

Name and address of the supplier
Name and address of the manufacturer of each product
Trade or proprietary name of each product
The international nonproprietary name (generic name) of the drug and its strength
In the case of the product containing more than one (1) active ingredient, the name and strength of each product
The pharmacopoeia specification of the ingredient of each product
Product registration number issued by the authority for each product
The quantity, pack size, unit value, and total value in convertible currency
Batch or lot number where applicable for each product
Manufacturing and expiration date, where applicable, for each product
Mode of shipment (sea, air, or road)
Authorized port of entry
Signature and stamp of the supplier
Per TZA-34, the import license application can be submitted to the TMDA via TZA-34, which can be accessed by first creating a trader account. An online access registration form is available in Annex I of the G-ImpExp.

As delineated in the TFDCA-ImptExpt and the G-ImpExp, the import permit is valid for six (6) months, not transferable, and issued to cover only one (1) shipment. Per the G-ImpExp, in the case of partial shipments, two (2) shipments may be allowed based on the initial import permit. See the TFDCA-ImptExpt and the G-ImpExp for detailed import application requirements.

The TFDCA-ImptExpt and the G-ImpExp identify the authorized ports of entry for pharmaceutical products imported into Tanzania. The TFDCA-ImptExpt states that an importer must provide all necessary documents as may, from time to time, be requested by the inspector. When it is deemed necessary to collect samples or where the inspector suspects that any product may contravene any regulation or law, the inspector may take samples for further investigation.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

In accordance with the CT-Regs and the G-AppConductCT, the Tanzanian government follows the International Council for Harmonisation's (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13), and requires the sponsor or the designated contract research organization (CRO) to provide investigators with an Investigator’s Brochure (IB). The G-AppConductCT states that the IB should be presented in a concise, simple, objective, balanced, and non-promotional form that enables a clinician, or potential investigator, to understand it and make an unbiased risk-benefit assessment of the appropriateness of the proposed trial. The contents of the IB should be approved by the disciplines that generated the described data and a medically qualified person should generally participate in the editing of an IB. If the investigational product (IP) is locally marketed and its pharmacology is well established and widely understood by medical practitioners, an extensive IB may not be necessary, and a current summary of product characteristics may be submitted as an alternative. If a marketed product is being studied for a new use (i.e., a new indication), an IB specific to that new use should be prepared. The IB should be reviewed at least annually and revised as necessary in compliance with a sponsor’s written procedures. More frequent revision may be appropriate depending on the stage of development and the generation of relevant new information.

TZA-13 specifies that the IB must contain all of the relevant information on the IP(s) obtained through the earlier research phases, including preclinical, toxicological, safety, efficacy, and adverse event data. Per the CT-Regs, the sponsor should also update the IB as significant new information becomes available and maintain records of each change.

TZA-13 requires the IB to provide coverage of the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation parameters
Non-clinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects of IP in humans (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; regulatory and post-marketing experiences)
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator(s)
Bibliography
See Section 7.3 of TZA-13 for detailed content guidelines.

Quality Management

Per the G-AppConductCT, the sponsor must document details regarding the chemistry, manufacturing, and control of the IP as prescribed in Module 3. This should include data to demonstrate the quality of the IP, including relevant batch analyses results. If a comparator medicinal product is used, the proprietary name of the medicinal product, non-proprietary or common name of the active pharmaceutical ingredient, company name, country from which the clinical supplies were obtained (as well as the market status in that country), dosage form(s), and strength(s) should be listed. Batch analysis results for the active pharmaceutical ingredient may be provided in either the quality summary or by providing a copy of the certificate of analysis. The certificate of good manufacturing practice should also be included in the clinical trial application.

As delineated in the GMP-Insp, domestic and foreign manufacturing facilities of human medicinal products must comply with good manufacturing practice (GMP) in the latest versions of the World Health Organization’s Technical Report Series (WHO-TRS). In addition, other guidelines—such as those by the ICH and Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme—may be used as supplementary guidance when establishing compliance of facilities to GMP requirements. The manufacturing facilities are subject to inspection by the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA). The GMP-Insp describes the types of inspections, inspection fees, and other procedures. If the TMDA finds noncompliance, the manufacturer must prepare and implement a Corrective Action and Preventive Action plan (CAPA). The CAPA plan must be prepared based on quality risk management principles and submitted to the TMDA. The CAPA report must indicate root cause analysis, corrections, corrective actions and preventive actions, timelines, and evidence of implementation for each non-compliance observation. Manufacturers must be allowed a maximum of two (2) rounds to submit CAPA responses. The first CAPA response must be submitted within 90 calendar days of the TMDA’s inspection report cover letter. If the assessment of the first CAPA response is deemed to be non-satisfactory, the manufacturer will have an opportunity to submit a second CAPA response within 60 calendar days. If the assessment of the second CAPA response is still non-satisfactory, the facility must be re-inspected. If the company fails to submit CAPA report within the prescribed period without any request for extension, the facility is deemed non-compliant.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Tanzania must comply with the requirements set forth in the CT-Regs, the TFDCA-ImptExpt, and the G-ImpExp. The TFDCA-ImptExpt and the CT-Regs state that for an IP to be used in a clinical trial, it must be properly labeled in English or Kiswahili (also known as Swahili) language or both, and the information printed on the labels must be indelible, engraved, or embossed on a primary and secondary container.

As set forth in the CT-Regs, the TFDCA-ImptExpt, and the G-ImpExp, the following information must be included on the label (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Statement indicating that the product is for “clinical trial purpose only”
Name, number, or identifying mark
Recommended storage conditions
Sponsor name and address
Protocol code or identification
Trade or brand name where appropriate
International Non-Proprietary Name (INN, Generic name)
Active ingredient quantities listed in the formulation
Manufacture and expiration dates
Batch or lot number
Storage conditions
Manufacturer name and address
Product registration number issued by the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) included in the outer and inner packaging, where applicable
Immediate outer packaging and the enclosed and accompanying literature must be in English or Kiswahili
Active pharmaceutical ingredient specification (BP, USP, etc.)
According to the CT-Regs, where applicable, investigational medicinal products must be labeled in a manner that protects the blinding. Also, re-labelling of any remaining investigational medicinal product from previously manufactured batches must be performed in accordance with established written procedures and good manufacturing practice principles.

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the sponsor is responsible for proper labelling of the IP(s). The investigational and comparator products must be labelled in conformity with the research protocol and the labelling must state that the product is for investigational purposes only.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

Per the G-AppConductCT, the sponsor must obtain approval from the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) for the investigational product (IP) dossier in the clinical trial application and any changes to the IP that relate to the chemistry and manufacturing information that may affect drug safety and quality. For example, specifications for the IP where limits of the test are relaxed or deleted; where a new impurity or degradation product has been identified; and addition of new raw materials, solvents, reagents, catalysts, or any other materials used in the manufacture of the active pharmaceutical ingredient.

The G-AppConductCT requires researchers to comply with the CT-Regs and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13). Per TZA-13, the sponsor must supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the IP(s), but not until the sponsor obtains approvals from the TMDA and an ethics committee. The sponsor must ensure the following:

IP product quality and stability over the period of use
IP manufactured according to any applicable Good Manufacturing Practices (GMPs)
Proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP(s)
Records maintained for document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP(s)
Acceptable storage temperatures, conditions, and times for the IP
Timely delivery of the IP(s)
Written procedures including instructions for handling and storage of the IP(s), adequate and safe receipt of the IP(s), dispensing of the IP(s), retrieval of unused IP(s), return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor, and disposal of unused IP(s) by the sponsor
Maintain sufficient quantities of the IP(s) to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary
See the GSDP-Reg and the G-GSDP for requirements and guidance on good storage and distribution practice, including on quality management, the design of premises, receiving areas, storage practices and conditions, stock control and rotations, and traceability of products.

The G-AppConductCT further requires the sponsor to be responsible for the destruction of unused and/or returned IPs. IPs should not be destroyed without prior written authorization by the sponsor. The delivered, used, and recovered quantities of product should be recorded, reconciled, and verified by or on behalf of the sponsor for each trial site and each trial period. Destruction of unused IPs should be carried out for a given trial site or a given trial period only after any discrepancies have been investigated and satisfactorily explained and the reconciliation has been accepted. Requests to dispose IPs must be made to and authenticated by the TMDA. The destruction must be done in accordance with applicable environmental regulations.

The TFDCA-ImptExpt requires that every importer or exporter of a pharmaceutical product must, in respect to the premises, make available the following information to the TMDA: an appropriate inventory control system; an inspection reports file; procedures for handling complaints; and registers for unfit medicines, controlled drugs, recalls, and customers. Further, an importer should maintain the following documents on the premises for a period of not less than one (1) year after the expiration date of the pharmaceutical product: final invoices with corresponding import permits; copies of delivery notes; and sales invoices.

Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, the sponsor must:

Provide to the ethics committee (EC) and all other regulatory authorities, a description of the investigational and comparator drugs and a dossier
Ensure that the IP and any comparator products are of appropriate quality and are subject to quality assurance procedures
Promptly provide the investigator with any relevant new information that arises during the course of the trial, including information relating to IP safety
Be responsible for proper packaging and labelling of the IP
Retain sufficient samples of each batch of the IP and a record of analyses and characteristics so that, if necessary, an independent laboratory may check the product for quality control or bioequivalence
Record Requirements

As set forth in the G-AppConductCT, which complies with TZA-13, the sponsor must ensure maintenance of the following:

Records documenting IP(s) handling, storage, shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction
A system for retrieving IPs and documenting this retrieval
A system to dispose of unused IP(s) and corresponding documentation
Sufficient quantities of the IP(s) used in the trial to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary, and maintenance of records of batch samples analyses and characteristics
Per the GSDP-Reg and the G-GSDP, good distribution and storage practices of pharmaceutical products must ensure the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Documentation is an essential part of the quality management system and must cover all written procedures, instructions, records, contracts, reports, and data, whether in paper or electronic form
Documents must be appropriately designed, completed, reviewed, authorized, distributed, and maintained as required
Documents must be readily available and retrievable for inspection by the TMDA
The nature, content, and retention of documentation related to distribution and investigations should be retained for at least one (1) year after the expiry date of the product of concern
Documents must be stored in facilities that safeguard against unauthorized access, modification, damage, deterioration, or loss
Written procedures must exist for the preparation, review, approval, use, and control of all documents
Documents must be laid out in an orderly format for easy completion, review, and verification
Documents should be reviewed regularly and kept up to date; they must use version control mechanisms
Outdated procedures should be removed from workstations and archived
Records must be accurate, legible, traceable, attributable, unambiguous, and maintained with backup and restoration procedures in place
Documents must not be hand-written unless necessary, in which case sufficient space should be provided
Any alterations to documents must be signed and dated, ensuring the original information remains visible; if applicable, reasons for changes must be recorded
Documents should be retained for at least five (5) years or as required by regulatory guidelines
Electronic and physical records must be stored securely, ensuring confidentiality and restricted access
Electronic storage and signatures may be employed, but access must be restricted, and electronic records must conform to regulatory requirements
Where applicable, electronic records must be backed up following written procedures; backups should be maintained both within and outside the facility to prevent accidental data loss
Dealers must maintain comprehensive records of all receipts, storage, issues, and distribution activities. These records must include at minimum: date of receipt or dispatch; Product name (brand and generic); Strength and dosage form; pack size (stock-keeping unit); quantity received or supplied; name and address of the supplier and customer; batch number and corresponding date markings; manufacturing and expiry dates; suitability of the supplier and qualification of customers
Written documentation must be sufficient to permit tracing and tracking of operations throughout the distribution process
Records should be created at the time each operation is undertaken
Internal and external audit reports must be retained along with records of complaints, investigations, and any corrective or preventive actions taken
Mechanisms must exist for the transfer of information, including quality or regulatory data, between distributors, customers, and the regulatory authority
Permanent records, written or electronic, must exist for each stored product, specifying recommended storage conditions and any necessary precautions
The G-AppConductCT further requires the sponsor to record and retain destruction operations of IPs. These documents should clearly identify, or allow traceability to, the batches and/or patient numbers involved and the actual quantities destroyed.

See the Data & Records Management section for information about clinical trial-related records retention requirements.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, human biological materials include any substance obtained from a human research participant including, but not limited to, blood, urine, stool, saliva, hair, nail clippings, skin, and microorganisms and other associated bio-products. In Tanzania, specimens are biological materials transferred between researchers/organizations for medical research use only (see TZA-10).

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
Import/Export

As delineated in the G-EthicsHR-TZA, investigators, sponsors, and collaborators must ascertain that in-country capacity to perform the required investigations/testing is not sufficient for the investigations before considering import of human biological materials outside the country. The only exception to this is when samples are being transferred for external quality assurance purposes. Investigators, sponsors, and collaborators are encouraged to build, develop, or strengthen local capacity for any investigative testing to fulfill the objectives of the proposed research study. All exchanges and transfers (including importation) of biological materials for research purposes requires approval from the National Health Research Ethics Committee (NatHREC).

The G-ResearchClearance requires foreign researchers to identify and affiliate with a locally-recognized institution. The local institution should support foreign partners in permit acquisition, communicating with relevant government offices, and facilitating the material transfer arrangements and access benefit sharing arrangements.

As indicated in TZA-5, when sharing or transferring material and/or data into or outside Tanzania, materials and/or data may be subject to government regulation and import/export control laws that define the conditions under which certain information, technologies, and materials can be transferred or shared. In situations where materials and/or data are shared or transferred from foreign or international investigators to Tanzania, the provider’s country regulations for sharing or transferring materials and/or data will guide the initial process. After sharing and/or transferring material and/or data outside Tanzania, the principal investigator should provide NatHREC with proof of shipment.

Material Transfer Agreement

As delineated in the G-ResearchClearance, all researchers granted Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH) research permits that involve the collection of human data intended to be exported outside Tanzania must submit to COSTECH a signed Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) (TZA-10) and a Data Transfer Agreement (DTA) (TZA-8) between the Tanzanian institution and its foreign counterpart. The MTA and DTA will specify the terms for collecting, storing, managing, transporting, and disposing or returning the materials and data to Tanzania. TZA-5 also requires submittal of the MTA and DTA to the NatHREC during the ethics review. Investigators who wish to share or transfer materials and/or data should complete an MTA or a DTA before any research samples/materials or data are transferred or shared with another institution, laboratory, or researcher. Authorized investigators and signatories from the recipient’s and provider’s institutions must complete the MTA and/or DTA and submit them to NatHREC for certification before any research samples, materials, and/or data is transferred or shared to another institution, laboratory, or researcher.

As delineated in the G-EthicsHR-TZA, when it is necessary to transfer samples for storage abroad, the host institution must negotiate an MTA with the recipient institution. The specific details of the MTA should include, among others, purpose for the transfer/export, clear arrangements for collaboration and benefit sharing, a framework for accessing and sharing data, restrictions to third-party transfer, and annual reports to the host institution and the National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR) on the status of the samples. Applications for permission to exchange or transfer human biological materials must be made to NIMR. The following are the necessary steps for the exchange or transfer of materials for research purposes:

The research study that involves the exchange or transfer of human biological material must first be registered and approved by the ethics committee (EC) through the established procedures for research approvals in Tanzania
The applicant must be a legal resident of Tanzania or be affiliated with a local legally recognized institution in Tanzania
A request for the exchange or transfer of human biological material must be made in writing to the Director General of NIMR
An MTA and any other document related to the exchange or transfer of human biological material must accompany the request for the exchange or transfer of the material
The MTA, after review and approval, is signed by the NIMR Director General or a delegate
After receipt of a signed MTA, the investigator is required to secure an export or import permit from the Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority (TMDA) to finalize the process that allows the movement of biological samples outside the country or to enter the country
The investigators must abide by any other requirements that are to be followed to facilitate the exchange or transfer of human biological material
Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: April 3, 2025
In accordance with the G-AppConductCT, prior to collecting, storing, or using a research participant’s biological specimen(s), informed consent must be obtained, including for any proposed archiving of specimens for future research. Per the G-EthicsHR-TZA, if it is anticipated that collected human biological materials may be used for other research purposes in the future, the informed consent should include information to participants about future intended use. The information should clearly state that the collected materials will be stored for possible future research studies. Research participants should be informed on measures to protect confidentiality and policies that will govern use of the samples in future research studies. After explaining the need to store the samples, the research study participant should be permitted to choose whether their samples should or should not be stored and/or used for future studies. See the G-EthicsHR-TZA for additional information on the storage and future use of biological samples.

(See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent).

Requirements
(Legislation) The Finance Act, 2019 (FinanceAct) (Effective July 1, 2019)
Parliament
(Legislation) The Law of the Child Act, 2009 (ChildAct) (2009)
Parliament
(Legislation) The National Institute for Medical Research Act, 1979 (MedRsrchAct) (1979)
Parliament
(Legislation) The Personal Data Protection Act, 2022 (PDP-Act) (Effective May 1, 2023)
Parliament
(Legislation) The Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Act, 2019 (TMMDAct) (Amended through June 2021)
Parliament
(Regulation) The Personal Data Protection (Personal Data Collection and Processing) Regulations, 2023 (PDP-Reg-TZA) (Effective July 4, 2023)
Ministry of Information, Communication and Information Technology
(Regulation) The Tanzania Food, Drugs and Cosmetics (Clinical Trials Control) Regulations, 2013 (CT-Regs) (March 15, 2013)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Regulation) The Tanzania Food, Drugs and Cosmetics (Pharmacovigilance) Regulations, 2018 (PV-Regs) (April 22, 2018)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Regulation) The Tanzania Food, Drugs and Cosmetics (Registration of Premises, Importation and Exportation of Pharmaceutical Products and Raw Materials) Regulations, 2015 (TFDCA-ImptExpt) (July 31, 2015)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Regulation) The Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices (Fees and Charges) Regulations, 2021 (TMMDAFees) (September 24, 2021)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Regulation) The Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices (Goods Storage and Distribution Practices) Regulations, 2021 (GSDP-Reg) (2021)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Guidance) Accreditation Guide for Institutional Research Ethics Committees in Tanzania (IERC-Accredit) (March 2023)
National Institute for Medical Research
(Guidance) Guidelines for Application to Conduct Clinical Trials in Tanzania (G-AppConductCT) (Revision 4) (March 2020)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines for Conducting Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and Good Clinical Laboratory Practices (GCLP) Inspection (G-GCPInspections) (2nd Edition) (November 2020)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practices – Inspection of Human Medicinal Products Manufacturing Facilities (GMP-Insp) (Second Edition) (January 2025)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines for Good Storage and Distribution Practices of Pharmaceutical Products (G-GSDP) (May 2024)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines for Importation and Exportation of Pharmaceutical Products and Raw Materials (G-ImpExp) (Fourth Edition) (January 2021)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines for Insurance and Indemnity of Clinical Trials in Tanzania (G-CTInsurance-TZA) (First Edition) (December 2010)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines for Reporting Safety Data in Clinical Trials (G-ReptSafetyData) (Second Edition) (November 2020)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines for Reviewing Health Research Protocols (G-RevPrtcl) (July 2022)
National Institute for Medical Research 
(Guidance) Guidelines on Ethics for Health Research in Tanzania (G-EthicsHR-TZA) (Third Edition) (2023)
National Institute for Medical Research
(Guidance) National Research Integrity Framework of Tanzania (G-ResearchIntegrity) (First Edition) (2020)
Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology
(Guidance) National Research Registration and Clearance Guidelines (G-ResearchClearance) (January 2022)
Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology
(Guidance) The Ethics Clearance Process – Client Service Charter (Version 2) (NatHREC-Charter) (April 2023)
National Institute for Medical Research
(Guidance) The Medical Research Coordinating Committee’s (TMRCC) Ethical Guidelines (G-TMRCC) (Date Unavailable)
Medical Research Coordinating Committee, National Institute for Medical Research
(Guidance) WHO Technical Report Series (WHO-TRS) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
World Health Organization
(Notice) Payment Procedures for Overseas Customers (Pay-Overseas) (April 30, 2024)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Notice) Publication of Clinical Trial Public Assessment Reports and GCP Public Inspection Reports (Pub-Rpts) (June 1, 2023)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Notice) Timelines for Issuance of Clinical Trial Certificates (CTC-Time) (May 8, 2023)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
Additional Resources
(Document) Checklist Ethical Clearance Application Submission (TZA-1) (September 2020)
National Institute for Medical Research
(Document) Payment for Ethical Clearance Fees (TZA-17) (Effective January 1, 2025)
National Institute for Medical Research
(Document) Research Ethics Information Management System (REIMS), Online Proposal Submission for Ethical Clearance, Instructions for Applicants (User Manual) (TZA-31) (September 2020)
National Institute for Medical Research
(Document) Standard Operating Procedures for the National Health Research Ethics Committee (TZA-5) (3rd Edition) (2023)
National Institute for Medical Research
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (TZA-30) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Guideline Addendum to ICH E11: Clinical Investigation of Medicinal Products in the Pediatric Population (E11) (R1) (TZA-12) (Step 4 Version) (Adopted August 18, 2017)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals (M3(R2)) (TZA-15) (Step 4 Version) (June 11, 2009)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (TZA-11) (Step 4 Version) (November 30, 1995)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Studies in Support of Special Populations: Geriatrics (E7) (TZA-14) (Step 4 Version) (June 24, 1993)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (TZA-13) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) Authorization of Clinical Trials (TZA-36) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Webpage) Clinical Trial Committee (TZA-37) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Webpage) Clinical Trials Control (TZA-4) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Webpage) Clinical Trials Control and Pharmacovigilance – Section Profile (TZA-2) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Webpage) COSTECH – Contact Us (TZA-46) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology
(Webpage) COSTECH – Establishment (TZA-45) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology
(Webpage) COSTECH RIMS – Login Form (TZA-48) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology
(Webpage) Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) (TZA-47) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology
(Webpage) GMP Inspection (TZA-19) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Webpage) Health Research Regulations (TZA-18) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
National Institute of Medical Research
(Webpage) ICH Adopted Guidelines (TZA-9) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Webpage) ICH Efficacy Guidelines (TZA-24) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) Institute Profile (TZA-50) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
National Institute for Medical Research
(Webpage) National Health Research Management Information System (NHRMIS) Login Page (TZA-32) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
National Institute for Medical Research
(Webpage) Regulatory Information Management System (RIMS) Customer Self Service Portal (TZA-34) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Webpage) Research Coordination (TZA-16) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology
(Webpage) Tanzania (TZA-23) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Health Research Web, Council on Health Research for Development
(Webpage) TMDA - Contact and Feedback (TZA-26) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Webpage) TMDA Clinical Trial and Pharmacovigilance Application Forms (TZA-35) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Webpage) TMDA Profile (TZA-29) (Current as of April 3, 2025)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
Forms
(Form) Application Form for Clinical Trial Protocol Amendment (a) (TZA-44) (Date Unavailable)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Form) Application Form for Clinical Trial Protocol Amendment (b) (TZA-43) (Date Unavailable)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Form) Application Forms and Summaries to Conduct Clinical Trials in Tanzania (TZA-38) (June 2020)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Form) CIOMS Form I (TZA-7) (Date Unavailable)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(Form) Clinical Trial Protocol Template (TZA-42) (Date Unavailable)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Form) Data Transfer Agreement for Researchers/Organizations (TZA-8) (2024)
National Institute for Medical Research
(Form) Declaration by Co- and Sub-Investigator (TZA-41) (Date Unavailable)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Form) Declaration by Monitor (TZA-40) (Date Unavailable)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Form) Declaration by Principal Investigator (TZA-39) (Date Unavailable)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
(Form) Material Transfer Agreement for Researchers/Organizations (TZA-10) (Date Unavailable)
National Institute for Medical Research
(Form) Six Monthly Progress Report for Clinical Trial of an Investigational Medicinal Product (TZA-3) (Date Unavailable)
Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Thailand
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
This message was reviewed on December 29, 2025
ECMOPH Website

The Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) website (http://www.ecmoph.moph.go.th/site/index) is not accessible to users residing outside of Thailand. 

Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Thai Food and Drug Administration

As per the DrugAct, ClinSampleProd, and ClinImprtOrdr, the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) is the regulatory authority responsible for controlling the import of drugs for research purposes, and it also uses this authority to indirectly regulate drug clinical trials in humans. Per ClinSampleProd and DrugProdReqs, the Thai FDA is also responsible for approving requests for permission to produce drug samples for the registration of drug formulas for human research studies. As set forth in the DrugAct and THA-33, the Thai FDA is a regulatory body under the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) and is granted control by the MOPH to protect consumer health. The agency is also authorized to ensure the quality, safety, and efficacy of health products including foods, drugs, cosmetics, and medical devices in Thailand.

In addition, per the DrugAct’s 2019 amendments and according to THA-6, the MOPH has the authority to establish and/or amend drug research-related procedures, regulations, and conditions via Government Gazette announcements. The Thai FDA’s Secretary-General is also permitted to control drug research study activities by issuing temporary suspensions, requesting specific improvements, or completely discontinuing a study that fails to comply with the Minister’s published guidelines.

As indicated in the DrugAct, the Thai FDA’s Medicines Regulation Division is a member of the Drug Board (also referred to as the Drug Committee in the English translation of the DrugAct). Per the DrugAct, the board must consist of MOPH departmental directors-general and representatives from related organizations, as well as five (5) to nine (9) drug experts. Every two (2) years, the Minister of Public Health appoints the Committee, which is chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the MOPH. The DrugAct also indicates that the board should appoint a subcommittee to study the drug review and approval process. The subcommittee should include at least the following: an office representative and Office of Consumer Protection Board representatives including association, foundation, and drug industry representatives whose purpose is to produce, sell, import, or order drugs for use in Thailand. See THA-33 for the Thai FDA’s organizational structure.

THA-49 further explains that the Medicines Regulation Division is in charge of reviewing licenses to import or order drugs used for clinical research in Thailand that are exempt from drug registration, issuing licenses to produce drug samples for drug formula registration, and issuing licenses to import or order drug samples for research purposes in Thailand. See THA-49 for additional information on the Medicines Regulation Division’s responsibilities. (See also THA-18 and THA-76 for appendices included in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr.)

As described in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr, the Thai FDA’s Medicines Regulation Division is responsible for application review and recommendation for approval. Per ClinSampleProd, the Secretary-General of the Thai FDA then makes the final decision to approve the application.

Division of Innovative Health Products and Services

As explained in THA-91, the Thai FDA’s Division of Innovative Health Products and Services is a service center that provides advice regarding health product authorization and research and development, product classification, and also accepts requests regarding health products. Its responsibilities include reviewing requests for one-stop service for locally researched and produced health products and innovative products. The Division also develops innovative electronic health product authorization processes; conducts research to develop work systems and establish standards for innovative products, such as for production processes, imports, sales, clinical research, and advertising; and develops policies, regulations, criteria, and practices regarding the licensing of health products. Per THA-66, the Division also houses the agency’s One Stop Service & Consultation Center (OSSC) (THA-35) within the Comprehensive Health Products Service Center. OSSC services include providing preliminary consultations, processing product application submissions (e.g., applications submitted to obtain drug import licenses for clinical research purposes), and handling payment services (e.g., permissions and licensing) for various health products including drugs. See the Submission Process section for more details on the import application submission process.

Contact Information

Per THA-72, the Thai FDA’s contact information is as follows:

Medicines Regulation Division
Food and Drug Administration
Ministry of Public Health
88/24 Tiwanon Road
Talat Khwan Subdistrict
Mueang District, Nonthaburi Province 11000

Email: drug@fda.moph.go.th
Email: saraban@fda.moph.go.th (General FDA Correspondence)
Phone: 0 2590 7000
Phone: 0 2590 1556 (FDA Call Center)
Fax: 0 2590 7116

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the DrugAct and ClinImprtOrdr, the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) is responsible for overseeing the import or ordering of drugs for clinical research purposes, and also uses this authority to indirectly regulate drug clinical trials in humans. Per ClinSampleProd and DrugProdReqs, the Thai FDA is also responsible for approving requests for permission to produce drug samples for the registration of drug formulas for human research studies. As per G-ResEthics, the scope of the Thai FDA’s assessment includes Phases I through IV clinical trials for new drugs (also referred to as “modern drugs”), traditional drugs (drugs intended for use in the practice of traditional medicine or to cure animal disease), unregistered drugs, registered drugs being studied in new doses or for indications not previously approved, and locally produced drugs that require efficacy testing.

As indicated in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and ECRegProc, the Thai FDA’s approvals of a drug import license and of a request for permission to produce sample drugs for human research studies are dependent upon obtaining proof of ethics committee (EC) approval to conduct the clinical trial by a Thai FDA approved EC. ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr further specify that for both types of approval requests, the application is either submitted to the Thai FDA after the research project and all of the research site(s) have been approved by an EC, or in parallel, pending review by the relevant EC.

Clinical Trial Review Process

As set forth in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and G-CT-DIPApp, the Thai FDA coordinates the review of applications submitted to obtain drug import licenses for clinical research purposes (N.Y.M.1) and applications submitted to request permission to produce drug samples for human research studies (P.Y.8). Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, an applicant should submit the application along with supporting documents to the Medicines Regulation Division.

Per G-CT-DIPApp, upon receipt of a drug import license application (N.Y.M.1) package, the Thai FDA’s One Stop Service & Consultation Center (OSSC) (THA-35) sends the application package to an officer in the Thai FDA’s International Affairs and Investigational Drug Section. After administrative processing and troubleshooting, the officer will send the application package to the assigned reviewer to proceed. The reviewer then receives the application package and performs a technical assessment. If the reviewer determines the package is technically correct, then it will be forwarded to the Thai FDA for approval. ClinImprtOrdr specifies that the Secretary-General is responsible for authorizing all drugs to be imported into the country. (See Submission Process and Timeline of Review sections for details on the administrative and technical processing and review timelines.)

According to the DrugAct, the Thai FDA’s approval of a drug import license application for clinical research purposes also serves as an import license that allows the sponsor to import investigational drugs into Thailand. The license will remain valid until December 31st of the year of issue. The license holder who would like to renew the license must file an application for renewal prior to the license expiration date. (See the Manufacturing & Import section for detailed license renewal instructions.)

Per G-CT-DIPApp, after the import license is granted, the applicant must inform or request permission from the Thai FDA prior to initiating the following:

Changes to clinical trial drug supplies
Changes to an approved protocol (protocol amendment) or changes related to or affecting participant safety
In cases where the sponsor is required to immediately make one (1) or more amendments because the clinical trial or the use of investigational products in the trial endangers the health of a clinical trial participant or other person, the applicant may immediately make the amendment without prior review by the Thai FDA. A corresponding notification clearly identifying the change and the rationale for immediate implementation of the change must be filed within 15 working days after the amendment implementation date. A corresponding notification letter referring to the related approved import license along with supplemental documents to be provided in the Form for Requesting Corrections/Additional Clarifications are also required (see ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 12) and THA-18 (Appendix 12)).

Per G-CT-DIPApp, after the import license is granted, the applicant must also notify the Thai FDA of changes to the protocol that do not affect the safety of the trial participants.

No information is currently available on the review process for P.Y.8 application submissions.

Per the ExprssChnnl, a request for expedited review of N.Y.M.1 and P.Y.8 applications through an express channel may be submitted to the Thai FDA’s OSSC (THA-35) in the case of a public health emergency. The processing time is 10 days from the date of receipt of the request for entry into the system. A letter explaining the request for expedited review must be attached to the standard application and accompanying documents, as applicable. Eligible applicants may request waivers of certain requirements based on appropriate and necessary reasons, clearly delineated in the form provided in the ExprssChnnl. The application may be submitted after all research sites have been approved by the EC, or in parallel while awaiting the results of review by at least one (1) EC.

Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) may also establish an academic committee or subcommittee for certain drugs requiring special supervision (e.g., the Academic Subcommittee on AIDS Vaccine Trials).

As delineated in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, the Thai FDA has procedures to monitor the research project before, during, and after the trial ends or is terminated. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd specify that the authorized Thai FDA officer will contact the licensee to schedule an inspection appointment and provide a letter notifying the licensee at least seven (7) days in advance, except in those cases where the Thai FDA has a special request to carry out an inspection immediately and does not notify the licensee in advance. Refer to ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd for detailed licensee information on preparing for the inspection. See also THA-18 (Appendix 11) and THA-76 (Appendix 7) for the self-examination form containing the Thai officer’s inspection summary).

Additionally, see the G-ATMPAuth for Thai FDA guidelines on conditional authorization of advanced medical therapy products (ATMPs).

Refer to the Submission Process section for submission requirements.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Thai Food and Drug Administration

In accordance with ClinDrugFees, the applicant is required to pay a fee to the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) to submit an application to request permission to import or order drugs for research purposes in Thailand. The ClinDrugFees states that the Thai FDA requires an administrative processing fee of 1,000 Baht to review and verify the correctness of certain application requests related to authorization, including:

Applications to request permission to import or order drugs into the Kingdom for research purposes without registering a drug formula (N.Y.M.1 form) (See ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 2) and THA-18 (Appendix 2) for N.Y.M.1 form)
Applications for drug samples produced for research studies (P.Y.8 form) (See ClinSampleProd (Appendix 1) and THA-76 (Appendix 1) for P.Y.8 form)
In addition, per ClinDrugFees and THA-78, the Thai FDA charges the following fees for the technical evaluation of documents of any application request related to authorization (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Application for permission to import or order drugs for research purposes in the country (N.Y.M.1) or to request permission to register and produce sample drugs for human research studies (P.Y.8): 4,000 Baht
Application to expand the scope of a license to produce drug samples and register new drugs for human research studies (for drugs in bioequivalence studies): 1,000 Baht
New research drug application to expand the scope of a license to produce drug samples and register a new drug for human research studies (for drugs other than those in bioequivalence studies): 4,000 Baht
Application to amend and request specific changes related to the application requests listed in the preceding bullets: 500 Baht
Requesting a certificate of pharmaceutical product (Certificate of Pharmaceutical Product/Certificate of Free Sale): 500 Baht
Request for review of accuracy and translation of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) assessment report from Thai version to English version: 1,500 Baht
In addition, per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, in the case of the applicant designating a power of attorney to submit a paper application in person or via PDF file, the Stamp Duty fee is 30 Baht per attorney designation.

Payment Instructions

According to the Thai FDA’s One Stop Service & Consultation Center (OSSC) (THA-35), the OSSC’s finance section provides payment services in cases where expenses need to be paid for various submissions, and accepts multiple payment methods including cash, credit cards, and mobile banking applications. However, per THA-79, in order to submit an electronic payment using the Thai FDA’s Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54), the applicant must first submit documentation to request access to the system as required by the OSSC (see THA-104 for information on submitting power of attorney to access the system as an agent). Once the OSSC approves e-submission system access, the applicant can submit a payment electronically to request a drug importation waiver via THA-54. See Submission Process section for detailed submission instructions and documentation requirements to access THA-54. Refer to THA-57 for the Skynet e-submission user manual and THA-87 for a guide to request a drug importation waiver via THA-54.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Note: The Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) website (http://www.ecmoph.moph.go.th/site/index) is not accessible to users residing outside of Thailand.

Overview

As per ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and ECRegProc, clinical trials require ethics committee (EC) approval for each trial site from an EC recognized by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA). ECRegProc indicates that an EC may function as a committee under a government agency (e.g., the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH)); as a committee affiliated with a private hospital/institution licensed to comply with the HospitalAct; or, as a committee operating as a part of a non-profit partnership between a government agency and a private organization(s) (e.g., the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC)). ECRegProc states that the Thai FDA posts a list of the approved/renewed ECs on its website (see THA-90), and as noted in THA-3, this usually occurs every two (2) years. According to THA-4, the ECMOPH and the CREC are both government ECs whose approvals are still active. As discussed in THA-63, the ECMOPH and the CREC are also collaborating on a multi-institutional clinical research project to reduce redundancy during the review process and to develop joint human research ethics guidelines. (See THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr.)

Per THA-1, the ECMOPH and the CREC represent the two (2) central ECs recognized by the Thai FDA to review and approve clinical research protocols involving humans. THA-1 further explains that both the ECMOPH and the CREC are categorized as central ECs because they can accept all clinical research studies for review, regardless of the trial sites involved.

See THA-94 for a CREC-maintained list of local/institutional ECs and their contact and submission information.

Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health

Per THA-39, the ECMOPH is responsible for controlling, supervising, and monitoring research in accordance with international ethical principles; developing research policies; suspending unethical research programs; creating a national database of clinical research; establishing a regional/international committee network system; developing personnel capacity to support clinical research in Thailand; and other related or assigned academic projects. See THA-13 for additional details about the ECMOPH, and THA-13 and THA-39 for requirements specifically related to studies approved by the ECMOPH.

Central Research Ethics Committee

Per THA-1, the CREC was formed in 2014 through the cooperative efforts of 26 public and private institutions in Thailand, including the Thai FDA. THA-44 explains that the goal of the CREC, which operates under the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT) and the Foundation for Human Research Promotion in Thailand, is to develop an effective collaborative system among institutional ECs in Thailand, and to improve the efficiency of the ethics review process. See THA-44 for additional information on the CREC, and the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for detailed CREC submission requirements.

Ethics Committee Composition

As per G-ResEthics, institutional ECs should consist of at least five (5) members, both male and female, with the following qualifications:

At least one (1) member with knowledge and experience in research fields regularly reviewed (e.g., medicine, public health, social science, etc.)
At least one (1) member who is a lawyer or has legal expertise
At least one (1) member who is unaffiliated with the institution, and, if possible, that member should be selected from the community where the institution is based
At least two (2) members who have patient care, counseling, and treatment knowledge and experience
At least one-third of the total EC should be knowledgeable or trained in human research ethics
ECRegProc, by comparison, also requires institutional ECs to have at least five (5) members who are experts on science, medicine, and ethics. In addition, the committee must include members representing the following qualifications:

At least three (3) members who are medical professionals
At least one (1) member must be an expert in a non-scientific category
At least one (1) member from outside of the institution where the trial is taking place
The International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) similarly indicates that ECs should be composed of medical personnel, scientists, and non-scientists, and also notes that while these committees may have differences in legal status, composition, and function, the duties of an EC should be consistent with THA-28. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

Because each EC has its own requirements, it is recommended that the individual ECs be contacted to confirm their specific requirements.

No information is available on ECMOPH and CREC composition requirements.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

As delineated in G-ResEthics and ECRegProc, ECs must conduct clinical protocol reviews according to THA-28 using written standard operating procedures (SOPs) that are periodically updated, and develop a process for conducting reviews. The SOPs should include information on EC composition, meeting schedules, timeframes for protocol reviews, quorum requirements, decision-making procedures, channels of communicating the decision(s), complaint processes, reviewing fees (if any), protection of protocol confidentiality, and prevention of possible conflicts of interests. The G-ResEthics also states that each EC must establish the composition, member terms of service, and criteria for selecting the committee members, as appropriate. The members must also be appointed officially as evidenced by a written document.

Additionally, per ECRegProc, ECs must meet the following requirements:

Have the legal qualifications or comply with the government regulations related to providing research or research-related services
Have a clearly defined structure with proof of appropriately appointed members, including the secretary and secretariat
Have voting rights and the right to issue independent research opinions without investigator/sponsor involvement, and with no direct or indirect interest or conflict of interest with the investigator or clinical research study
Have members who are trained in conducting research and clinical trials in human participants, and who participate in ethics training or other related training at least once every two (2) years while serving on the committee
Have experience in reviewing human research involving experimental drugs for at least 10 studies
For detailed EC requirements and information on other administrative processes, see G-ResEthics and ECRegProc.

Also, refer to THA-93 for a list of CREC forms for submitting research project documents and THA-37 for a complete list of CREC SOPs. See THA-101 for the CREC meeting schedule.

No information is available on the ECMOPH’s terms of reference, review procedures, and meeting schedule.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

As delineated in G-ResEthics, ECRegProc, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), the primary scope of information assessed by Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) recognized ethics committees (ECs) relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial. According to THA-10, clinical research and trials (i.e., research studies and experiments on humans) are subject to the medical ethics standards delineated in the Regulations of the Medical Council on Maintaining the Ethics of the Medical Profession (B.E. 2549) (MCEthics) and the Declaration of Rights and Code of Conduct for Patients (THA-11).

MCEthics explains that ECs are established to review the ethical aspects of research studies and human trials to protect the rights, safety, and well-being of participants in research studies and human trials. THA-11 indicates that every patient has the fundamental right to receive professional medical and health care from health professionals without discrimination as provided for in the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand (B.E. 2560). According to THA-14, researchers should treat all research participants, whether animate or inanimate, with appropriate respect and consideration and should take full responsibility for the impact and consequences of their research. Researchers should also have respect for the dignity and rights of their human participants. Per G-ResEthics, ECRegProc, and THA-28, ECs must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses, and Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations).

In addition, per G-ResEthics, ECRegProc, and THA-28, ECs are also responsible for ensuring an independent, timely, and competent review of all ethical aspects of the clinical trial protocol. ECs must act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved, evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants; confirming the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, and methods; and verifying the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards. G-ResEthics further states that ECs should review the ethical aspects of the protocol in compliance with current international ethical guidelines while taking into account local or national laws, religions, traditions, and cultures. Per G-ResEthics, the appointed EC is also responsible for ensuring that research conducted within the institution adheres to ethical principles including those established in the Declaration of Helsinki (THA-45), the Council for International Organizations of Medical Science (CIOMS)’ International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects (THA-7), and the World Health Organization (WHO)’s Operational Guidelines for Ethics Committees that Review Biomedical Research (THA-64). See G-ResEthics, ECRegProc, and THA-28 for detailed ethical review guidelines. MCEthics further states that the medical practitioner who conducts or participates in the research study on humans must only undertake such study or experiment after it is approved by the EC responsible for the study. The medical practitioner must also conform to G-ResEthics and THA-14 when conducting the research study.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

Pursuant to ClinImprtOrdr and ECRegProc, Thai FDA-recognized ECs are responsible for reviewing and approving protocols for clinical research related to drugs to be imported into Thailand. Per ClinSampleProd and DrugProdReqs, the Thai FDA is also responsible for approving requests for permission to produce drug samples for the registration of drug formulas for human research studies. As stated in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and ECRegProc, the Thai FDA’s approvals of a drug import license and of a request for permission to produce sample drugs for human research studies are dependent upon obtaining approval by a Thai FDA approved EC. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd further specify that for both types of approval requests, the application is either submitted to the Thai FDA after the research project and all the research sites have been approved by an EC, or in parallel, pending review by at least one (1) EC involved in the study.

G-ResEthics further states that research conducted in public hospitals or public health care facilities involves expenditures such as laboratory tests and lump sum fees determined by the institution. The disclosure of these payments and other budget items enables the EC to evaluate any conflict of interest and helps the investigator to decide whether to conduct the trial.

In the instance of a multicenter clinical trial, G-ResEthics indicates that protocols submitted to each institution’s EC should contain the same substance and details, and should specify the quality control techniques to ensure that research practices are the same in each institution. Although each institutional EC may independently approve or disapprove an application, G-ResEthics advises the committees from each participating institution to consult with one another to reach a clearly agreed upon decision.

There is no stated expiration date for an EC approval in G-ResEthics, in the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) guidelines (THA-13), or on the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) website. Per ECRegProc, ECs must provide continuous supervision and monitoring, and conduct inspections to ensure that clinical trial operations are carried out in compliance with all approved research projects and research sites without any deviations or changes from those approved by the committee, unless otherwise specified according to THA-28. ECs must also supervise and monitor research projects to ensure that participants’ rights, safety, and well-being are protected (e.g., in the case of an adverse event, etc.).

Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health

According to THA-13, an application submitted to the ECMOPH is initially reviewed by at least two (2) advisors, followed by a final review by the ECMOPH at its regular meeting. At this meeting, the advisors present a summary of the proposal to the committee along with their recommendations. The committee discusses the proposal and sends a list of comments to the principal investigator (PI) for clarification. Once the PI provides the requested information, the committee makes a final decision, and this is reported to the ECMOPH Chairman and the Permanent Secretary for Public Health respectively. A letter of notification signed by the Permanent Secretary for Public Health is then forwarded to the PI and the responsible organization. As earlier stated, this review and approval process is specific to the ECMOPH. However, it can be used to obtain a better understanding of the EC process within Thailand.

Central Research Ethics Committee

As indicated in THA-24, a research project is eligible to apply for CREC review when it meets one (1) of the following criteria:

It is a pharmaceutical-sponsored multi-center clinical trial
It is an investigator-initiated, multi-site study granted by a research funding organization (e.g., the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT), the Thai Health Promotion Foundation (ThaiHealth), the Health Systems Research Institute (HSRI), etc.)
It is a single center, multi-site study of researchers at partner institutions with co-researchers from each site
It is assigned by the Executive Board for consideration
According to THA-100, the PI must submit the research protocol to the CREC three (3) weeks prior to the CREC meeting. As delineated in THA-98 and THA-100, submissions to the CREC are received by the CREC Sorting Secretary, which reviews the research protocol for completeness within five (5) working days. The research protocol may undergo an expedited review (completed within 10 days) or a full board review (completed according to each panel’s schedule). Per THA-100, exemption decisions are also made within 10 working days.

THA-98 and THA-100 indicate that for both types of reviews, the PI or research coordinator will be informed of the CREC decision within five (5) working days. THA-98 notes that CREC review of amendments follows the same processes, except that an expedited review will be completed within five (5) days. Additionally, the PI, research coordinator, or site investigator must submit documents to the local EC in accordance with institutional requirements (within 30 days).

THA-100 further states that if applicable, the PI must submit a revised protocol to the CREC according to the committee’s suggestions within three (3) working days. The CREC will review the revised protocol within 10 working days.

Refer to THA-98 and THA-24 for additional CREC requirements. Additionally, see THA-97 and THA-99 for guidance related to CREC collaboration with local ECs in multi-institutional research projects.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
The Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) and the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) are both ethics committees (ECs) recognized by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) to review and approve clinical trial protocols.

Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health

No information is currently available on ECMOPH fees.

Central Research Ethics Committee

As set forth in CRECFees, the CREC requires investigators to pay a nonrefundable fee to submit a clinical trial research protocol for ethical review and approval.

CRECFees and THA-50 specify the following fees for the ethical review of research projects funded by private capital (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

New research project: 50,000 Baht
Request for certification renewal of old research project: 20,000 Baht
Amendments to the research project (research outline amendments/adding a research location): 10,000 Baht
Report requesting amendments to the research outline: Amendment certified by the local EC of the joint research institute in the CREC-certified research project, followed by a report submitted for CREC consideration (site-specific amendment): No fees charged
Reporting adverse events, reporting non-compliance, notifying the CREC of a research project closure, and various other reports: No fees charged
Edit the Certificate of Approval (CoA) document: 1,000 Baht (see THA-108 for additional information on CoA amendment fees)
Edit certification/acknowledgement: 500 Baht
Edit document with certified seal: 500 Baht
For research projects funded by government agencies, royal colleges, medical professional associations, or personal capital, CRECFees and THA-50 delineates the following fees:

New research project: 25,000 Baht
Request for certification renewal of old research project: 10,000 Baht
Amendments to the research project (research outline amendments/adding a research location): 5,000 Baht
Report requesting amendments to the research outline: Amendment certified by the local EC of the joint research institute in the CREC-certified research project, followed by a report submitted for CREC consideration (site-specific amendment): No fees charged
Reporting adverse events, reporting non-compliance, notifying the CREC of a research project closure, and various other reports: No fees charged
Edit the CoA document: 500 Baht (see THA-108 for additional information on CoA amendment fees)
Edit the certification/acknowledgement: 250 Baht
Edit document with certified seal: 250 Baht
Payment Instructions

THA-42 explains that investigators should submit ethics application fee payments to the following bank:

Bank Name: Krungthai Bank
Branch: Phahonyothin 39
Account Type: Savings Account
Account Name: Foundation for Human Research Promotion in Thailand
Account number: 981-2-84782-0

Per CRECFees and THA-25, the investigators must submit proof of payment with the application submission. CRECFees indicates that the investigators and research sponsor are responsible for paying the fees and preparing the documentation to submit to the research institute. In the case of an investigator having transferred fees for a project that has been cancelled, the investigator may request a refund. The Foundation will deduct 20% of the transferred fee. The investigator should contact the bank for any service fee applied.

THA-50 and THA-25 indicate that any questions regarding the payment submission process may be directed to the following contact:

Miss Netdao Kanseecha
Financial Officer
Phone: 061-089-9966
Email: natdown@crecthailand.org

Per THA-25, if the CREC has no evidence of payment, the application submission will be considered incomplete. See THA-25 for more details on fee payment processes, and THA-50 for additional information on fee rate based on funding source and fee receipts.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

As indicated in ECRegProc, ClinImprtOrdr, and ClinSampleProd, institutional ethics committees (ECs) and other types of ECs, including the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) and the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC), must be authorized by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) to conduct ethical reviews of drug clinical trial protocols. ClinImprtOrdr and ECRegProc specify that authorized ECs are responsible for reviewing and approving protocols for clinical research involving drugs to be imported into Thailand. (See also THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices relating to EC authorization in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd.)

As per ECRegProc, an acceptance letter issued to the ECs by the Thai FDA is valid for two (2) years and may be obtained by applying to the agency using the Jor Thor Form EC-1 (THA-23). Each EC is also required to submit an annual report (THA-21) to the Thai FDA, and to apply for an acceptance extension no later than 60 days before the expiration date. See THA-107 for additional relevant forms.

ECRegProc states that the Thai FDA posts a list of the approved/renewed ECs on its website (see THA-90) and as noted in THA-3, this usually occurs every two (2) years. These ECs are approved in addition to the centralized ECMOPH and the CREC.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

Pursuant to EC-QualAccredReq, in addition to the ECRegProc approval and renewal of approval documentation requirements, the Thai FDA requires ECs to submit proof of accreditation based on an evaluation by a quality accreditation agency in compliance with international accreditation standards. The following organizations are approved by the Thai FDA to provide quality accreditation reviews:

National Ethics Committee Accreditation System of Thailand (NECAST)
The Strategic Initiative for Developing Capacity in Ethical Review (SIDCER)/The Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Asian and Western Pacific Region (FERCAP)
The Association for the Accreditation of Human Research Protection Programs (AAHRPP)
Other Thai FDA-approved quality accreditation agencies
Per EC-QualAccredReq, EC submissions will be reviewed and completed within one (1) business day.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Note: The Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) website (http://www.ecmoph.moph.go.th/site/index) is not accessible to users residing outside of Thailand.

Overview

In accordance with ClinImprtOrdr and G-CT-DIPApp, the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for submitting a drug import license application for clinical research purposes to the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA). Per ClinSampleProd and DrugProdReqs, the Thai FDA is also responsible for approving requests for permission to produce drug samples for the registration of drug formulas for human research studies.

As set forth in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and ECRegProc, the Thai FDA’s approvals of a drug import license and of a request for permission to produce drug samples for human research studies are dependent upon obtaining proof of ethics committee (EC) approval from the Thai FDA to conduct the clinical trial. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd further specify that for both types of approval requests, the application is either submitted to the Thai FDA after the research project and all the research sites have been approved by an EC, or in parallel, pending review by at least one (1) EC involved in the study. (Note: Per ClinImprtOrdr, the sponsor is also referred to as the applicant or importer.)

Regulatory Submission

OSSC Pre-Submission Permission

According to THA-77 and THA-75, prior to submitting a drug import license application (N.Y.M.1 form), an applicant must first request permission from the Thai FDA’s One Stop Service & Consultation Center (OSSC) (THA-35) to use the OSSC’s online consultation system (E-Consult) (THA-77). Per THA-65, requesting E-Consult permission is a two-part process that initially requires applicants who are Thai citizens to create a user account and register via Digital ID (THA-89) which enables Thai citizens to access all government agency electronic services using a single user account/password. The user account can then be used to submit applications and supporting documentation to the Thai FDA’s Medicines Regulation Division via the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54).

Per THA-65 and THA-77, once registered in THA-89, Thai applicants (i.e., the general public, entrepreneurs, or researchers) are subsequently required to provide documentation to E-Consult (THA-77) to confirm that they, or representatives authorized to act on their behalf, are authorized to use the FDA’s Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54). Although non-citizens cannot register directly with THA-89, they can request permission to authorize a juristic person who receives power of attorney (i.e., agency representatives, registration agents, or researchers who submit applications on behalf of an agency). Documentation should be submitted to E-Consult (THA-77) either in person or via email (econsultcenter@fda.moph.go.th) specifying in the subject line: “Request for authorization to use the information system.”

Per THA-77, for Thai applicants, this documentation includes:

Request Form for Permission to Use the Health Product Consultation System (E-Consult) (THA-80)
Copy of identity card
Per THA-77, for juristic applicants with power of attorney, this documentation includes:

Request Form for Permission to Use the Health Product Consultation System (E-Consult) (THA-80)
Copy of juristic person certificate
Power of attorney form (THA-81)
Copy of identity card of grantor (the national identity card issued to Thai citizens)
Copy of identity card of attorney-in-fact (refers to a passport)
See also THA-51 and THA-66 for additional information on services provided by the OSSC’s E-Consult Service.

Import and Export Division Pre-Submission Permission

Per THA-79, the Thai FDA’s Import and Export Inspection Division also requires applicants to request permission to access the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54) prior to being permitted to submit a drug import waiver application for clinical trial purposes. Also, per THA-87, Thai applicants may register and submit authorization documentation via THA-54 once they have obtained access.

The following forms are also provided on THA-85 by the Import and Export Inspection Division to complete these requests: Request for Officers at the Import Checkpoint to Inspect Drugs Brought or Ordered into the Kingdom for Research, Analysis, Exhibition, or Charitable Donation (Form N.D.W.) (THA-105), List of Items Attached to N.D.W. (THA-106), and Application Form for Medicine Importation (THA-84). See THA-85 for additional related forms, and THA-104 for information on submitting power of attorney to access the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54) as an agent.

Submissions

N.Y.M.1

As delineated in ClinImprtOrdr, the Thai FDA accepts paper and electronic clinical trial application submission packages for requests to import or order drugs for clinical research. However, paper applications are only to be submitted at the discretion of an agency officer when it is determined that the application process cannot be completed electronically via the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54) for Medicines Regulation Division review and approval (see Submission Content section for content details).

As per ClinImprtOrdr, for paper submissions, sponsors must submit two (2) original sets with real signatures of the completed N.Y.M.1 form (ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 2) and THA-18 (Appendix 2)) with the required attachments to the Thai FDA. For paper submissions, the applicant must also submit an MS Word template file for importing the data electronically, so that the file can be connected to the information in the drug importation and clinical research sections in the information system. A copy of all the submitted documents should also be provided in PDF format. G-CT-DIPApp also states that two (2) sets of the application package must be submitted to the Thai FDA. Per ClinImprtOrdr, if the Thai FDA reviewer determines that submitted documents require correction or additional documentation needs to be submitted, the applicant must make corrections/clarifications based on the evaluation results within the specified time by submitting a correction/clarification request form (see ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 12) and THA-18 (Appendix 12)).

Additionally, per ClinImprtOrdr, the non-local applicant must authorize a qualified person through a power of attorney to submit an application and respond to requests to provide clarification, amend, and/or receive documents related to the submission. The attorney-in-fact should be someone who has knowledge in pharmacy or a related medical field as well as an understanding of requests, permissions, etc. relating to the application submission and associated documentation. The scope and responsibilities of the attorney-in-fact must be specified in the authorization to include filing application submission clarifications and corrections. The authorization documentation should be submitted with the paper application. ClinImprtOrdr further notes that one (1) set of power of attorney submission documentation may only be used for one (1) application submission request.

ClinImprtOrdr also states that the application submission should include documentary evidence for quality control and drug production separated by drug. The identification of the manufacturer of each drug included in the submission must match the one specified in the Microsoft Excel files for the Logistics System (See ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 7) and THA-18 (Appendix 7) for the manufacturer’s form).

As indicated in ClinImprtOrdr and G-CT-DIPApp, Thai and English are the preferred languages for use in preparing an application package for requests to import or order drugs for clinical research. The following requirements are specified (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Research project name and summary of research project in Thai
Drug packaging documents for already registered drugs presented in Thai or English (Note: if drug formula documentation from abroad is in a foreign language other than English, then it should be translated into Thai or English and certified that the text matches the Thai/English language version)
Protocol synopsis in Thai
Detailed study protocol specification (completed version of study protocol) in Thai or English
Patient information sheet in Thai or translated to an appropriate language and certified the text matches the Thai version
Drug labels for every package size in Thai or English
EC approval document in Thai
Certificate of Free Sale in English and translated by a trusted certification authority and any other language in which it has been originally issued
Progress report in Thai
Additionally, as explained in THA-79, once the applicant has obtained permission from the Import and Export Inspection Division to access the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54), a drug import waiver application (N.Y.M.1) may be submitted electronically. Per THA-87, following official review of the submitted documentation, a response will sent within one (1) business day. THA-87 and THA-79 indicate that once the request is approved, a License Per Invoice (LPI) number will be used in making a goods declaration with the Thai Customs Department. See THA-48, THA-86, and THA-88 for additional information and instructions on submitting an LPI to Customs). Refer to THA-57 and THA-87 for detailed instructions on submitting a drug importation waiver request via THA-54.

P.Y.8

As indicated in ClinSampleProd, the Thai FDA also accepts paper and electronic clinical trial application submission packages for requests for permission to produce sample drugs for human research studies. However, if the electronic system is not available, the application must be submitted in paper form, along with the appropriate supporting documentation (see Submission Content section for content details). In the case of filing via the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54), information will be filled in the system in a P.Y.8. form, and the research project information will be created automatically. If the Thai FDA reviewer determines that submitted documents require correction or additional documentation needs to be submitted, the applicant must make corrections/clarifications based on the evaluation results within the specified time by submitting a correction/clarification request form (see ClinSampleProd (Appendix 8) and THA-76 (Appendix 8)). The paper documentation should be submitted to the New Drugs and Drug Research Promotion Group within the Medicines Regulation Division or submitted electronically via THA-54. When submitting a paper application, the applicant must also submit a template file for importing the data via THA-54 to serve as a starting point for operators in the electronic process and for use in overseeing the trial. A copy of all the submitted documents should also be provided in PDF format.

Additionally, per ClinSampleProd, the non-local applicant must authorize a qualified person through a power of attorney to submit an application and respond to requests to provide clarification, amend, and/or receive documents related to the submission. The attorney-in-fact should be someone who has knowledge in pharmacy or a related medical field as well as an understanding of requests, permissions, etc. relating to the application submission and associated documentation. The scope and responsibilities of the attorney-in-fact must be specified in the authorization to include filing application submission clarifications and corrections. The authorization documentation should be submitted with the paper application, or via the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54), if the application is being submitted electronically. ClinSampleProd further notes that one (1) set of power of attorney submission documentation may only be used for one (1) application submission request.

As indicated in ClinSampleProd, Thai and English are the preferred languages for use in preparing an application package to request permission to produce investigational drugs for clinical research. The following requirements are specified:

Research project name in Thai and English
Summary of research project in Thai
Drug labels for every package size in Thai or English
Patient Information Sheet in Thai
EC approval document in Thai
Complete research project details in Thai or English
Express Channel

Per the ExprssChnnl, a request for expedited review of N.Y.M.1 and P.Y.8 applications through an express channel may be submitted to the Thai FDA’s OSSC (THA-35) in the case of a public health emergency. The application should be submitted in document form with a CD containing the data file at the OSSC during business hours. See the Scope of Assessment section for more information on the express channel.

OSSC Contact Information for Application Submissions

Per THA-65 and THA-77, the following is contact information for submitting an application to the OSSC (THA-35) in person or via email, and for requesting permission to access the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54):

One Stop Service Center (OSSC)
Building 6, 5th Floor
Food and Drug Administration Building
Ministry of Public Health
88/24 Tiwanon Road
Talat Khwan Subdistrict
Mueang District, Nonthaburi Province 11000

Email (E-Consult): econsultcenter@fda.moph.go.th
Phone: 02 590 7614 (Consultation E-service for general inquiries, reporting usage problems, and issues related to requesting permissions)

See also THA-52 for the Medicines Regulation Division staff list.

Ethics Review Submission

Per G-ResEthics, each institutional EC should establish its own requirements for protocol submission along with the required documents including the application, number of research protocol copies to be submitted, the patient information sheet, the informed consent form, and the case report form. Each EC should also communicate these requirements to personnel or staff within the institution.

According to THA-4, if a trial site is not affiliated with a Thai FDA-recognized EC, the investigator(s) usually needs to apply to two (2) ECs for approval—the unaffiliated local EC and a central EC approved by the Thai FDA. THA-1 further explains that both the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) and the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) are categorized as central ECs because they can accept all clinical research studies for review, regardless of the trial sites involved.

See THA-94 for a CREC-maintained list of local/institutional ECs, which also includes contact and submission information.

Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health

According to THA-13, the ECMOPH requires one (1) original and 20 copies of the protocol submitted in Thai, and one (1) copy submitted in English for review purposes.

Per THA-41, investigators can electronically submit applications to the ECMOPH to obtain approval for new research projects or to request other services via the ECMOPH e-submission login page (THA-40).

Central Research Ethics Committee

THA-95 indicates that all research project submissions should be sent via email to official@crecthailand.org. Contact the Project/Academic Coordination office via email (official@crecthailand.org) or phone (098-325-2765, 082-258-9529) with any questions. According to THA-47, the applicant may request additional information for new project submissions from Ms. Nattha Wongwutthisarot via email (natta@crecthailand.org) or phone (087 6744405).

Per THA-34, in the case where the research project has a complete research proposal in English, a shortened version of the research proposal should be provided in Thai as well. A protocol submission form from the EC of any institution involved in the research project can be prepared and submitted to the CREC for consideration.

See also THA-34 for detailed application package documentation submission requirements and THA-37 for a comprehensive list of all the CREC Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). See THA-93 for a list of CREC forms for submitting research project documents.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

N.Y.M.1

As per ClinImprtOrdr and G-CT-DIPApp, sponsors must submit the following documents to the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) to request a drug import waiver request (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Cover letter
Application for Permission to Import or Order Drugs for Research Purposes in the Kingdom (N.Y.M.1 form) (see ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 2) and THA-18 (Appendix 2))
Checklists and Attached Documents for N.Y.M.1 form (see appendices in ClinImprtOrdr and THA-18)
Drug labels for every package size in Thai or English
Package inserts (for registered drugs)
Prescriptions (for registered drugs)
Investigator’s Brochure (IB) (for unregistered drugs)
Informed Consent Form in Thai
Patient Information Sheet in Thai
Research project summary in Thai
Completed version of study protocol in Thai or English
Chemistry, manufacturing, and control (CMC) information
Ethics Committee (EC) approval from a Thai FDA-recognized institutionally-based EC and/or an independent EC. If waiting for approval from the relevant EC, instead submit the latest protocol version under consideration.
Estimates of the amount of study drug, comparators, or other goods to be imported
Certificate of Analysis
Certificate of Free Sale in English and other language used
Drug registration authorization document
Summary of product characteristics
Literature review
Description (name and content) and pictures of lab/materials to be imported
Power of attorney
Investigational medicinal product (IMP) information
Per ClinImprtOrdr, when an applicant authorizes a qualified person through a power of attorney to submit an application package, the following documents must also be included with the submission:

Copy of identity card of the grantor and the attorney-in-fact with signatures to certify that they are true copies
Stamp duty in the amount of 30 Baht per one (1) power of attorney designation
As delineated in G-CT-DIPApp, applicants are also required to submit the following documents to the Thai FDA regarding EC approval:

Protocol title
List of principal investigator(s) (PIs)
Proposed study site
List of documents reviewed and approved by the EC, including the document version
Period of approval and/or date of expired approval
As noted in ClinImprtOrdr, the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) may also establish an academic committee or subcommittee for certain drugs requiring special supervision (e.g., the Academic Subcommittee on AIDS Vaccine Trials to review AIDS vaccines, etc.). Therefore, when submitting an application to request permission to import or order a specialized drug for clinical research requiring this type of oversight, an additional approval letter from the relevant committee is also required. Additional information on obtaining the approval for the committee is not available.

P.Y.8

Per ClinSampleProd, applicants must submit the following documents to the Thai FDA to request permission to produce drug samples for the registration of drug formulas for human research studies:

Application for Permission to Produce Drug Samples for Drug Formula Registration (P.Y.8. Form) (see ClinSampleProd (Appendix 1) and THA-76 (Appendix 1))
Research project summary in Thai
Certification of compliance with the terms and conditions related to the production of drug samples for use in human research studies
Certificate of Compliance for Principal Investigators
Evidence of insurance or compensation
Power of attorney (for paper submissions)
A copy of the license to produce modern drugs (for paper submissions)
Drug labels for every package size in Thai or English
Copy of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Certificate
Drug leaflet (for bioequivalence study drugs)
IB (for research drugs)
Patient Information Sheet in Thai
EC approval from a Thai FDA-recognized institutionally-based EC and/or an independent EC, except in the case of waiting for approval from the relevant EC
Drug quality control and pharmaceutical production documentation
Documents approved by relevant technical committees (if any)
Complete research proposal in Thai or English
Document self-verification form (see ClinSampleProd (Appendix 7) and THA-76 (Appendix 7))
Per ClinSampleProd, when an applicant authorizes a qualified person through a power of attorney to submit an application package, the following documents must also be included with the submission:

Copy of identity card of the grantor and the attorney-in-fact with signatures to certify that they are true copies
Stamp duty in the amount of 30 Baht per one (1) power of attorney designation
As noted in ClinSampleProd, the MOPH may also establish an academic committee or subcommittee for certain drugs requiring special supervision (e.g., the Academic Subcommittee on AIDS Vaccine Trials to review AIDS vaccines, etc.). Therefore, when submitting an application to request permission to import or order a specialized drug for clinical research requiring this type of oversight, an additional approval letter from the relevant committee is also required. Additional information on obtaining the approval for the committee is not available.

Express Channel

Per the ExprssChnnl, a request for expedited review of N.Y.M.1 and P.Y.8 applications through an express channel must be submitted with a letter explaining the request, along with the standard application and accompanying documents, as applicable. Eligible applicants may request waivers of certain requirements based on appropriate and necessary reasons, clearly delineated in the form provided in the ExprssChnnl. See the Scope of Assessment section for more information on the express channel.

Ethics Committee Requirements

Per G-ResEthics, each institutional EC should establish its own requirements for protocol submission along with the required documents including the application, number of research protocol copies to be submitted, the patient information sheet, the informed consent form, and the case report form. Each EC should also communicate to personnel or staff within the institution.

Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health

Per THA-13, the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) requires investigators (applicants) to submit the following documentation for ethics approval:

One (1) original set and 20 copies of the protocol in Thai and one (1) copy in English for review
Ethical considerations
Combined information sheet and informed consent certificate for research participants
Budget details and funding source
Curriculum Vitae (CV) for each research team member
Letter of approval from implementing institution
Results of ethical review by EC of implementing institution, if available
Data collection/questionnaire tools
Letter signed by PI’s supervisor
For an international project, Thai and foreign PIs required for each side
Material transfer agreement for transfer of blood or biomedical samples
References
Refer to THA-13 for detailed ECMOPH submission requirements respectively.

Central Research Ethics Committee

According to THA-34 and THA-96, investigators applying for an initial research project review by the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) should submit the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Invoice/proof of payment (Word and PDF files required)
Book/research outline submission notes signed by investigator (Word and PDF files required)
List of Documents (AP 08-S04 (THA-96)) (Word and PDF files required)
Patient Information Sheet Checklist (AP 09-S04 (THA-109))
Proposal for Ethics Review for Biomedical Research Projects (CREC form AP 04-S04 (THA-102)) signed by investigator (Word and PDF files required)
Complete research proposal
Shortened research proposal in Thai, if the complete research proposal is in English
Informed consent form (ICF)/letter of intent to consent (a master version of the informed consent documents in English may be used for all institutions; alternatively, each institution may also use their own documents) (See also THA-46 for the CREC recommended ICF template)
Case report form
IB (including Investigator’s Guide; a certificate that the drug has been approved by the Thai FDA; a label in the case of a drug that has been registered with the Thai FDA; a toxicity guideline; and a package insert)
Other documents (including questionnaire or interview form; notebooks; research participant recruitment documents such as leaflets, posters, and public relations scripts; and other documents applicable to volunteers/research participants)
Various documents for notification
(Draft) Material transfer agreement (MTA) (must be uploaded according to each institution’s form)
(Draft) Research project budget
Investigator CVs and evidence of good clinical practice (GCP) and research ethics training
Conflict of Interest Form completed by PIs/co-investigators (CREC form AP 06-S04 (THA-103)) (separate documents by institution)
Refer to THA-34 for detailed CREC submission requirements. See THA-93 for a list of CREC forms for submitting research project documents.

Clinical Protocol

As delineated in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, and G-CT-DIPApp, the clinical protocol should include the following elements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Protocol summary/synopsis
General information (e.g., sponsor and investigator(s) name(s) and address(es))
Background information (e.g., investigational product name and description)
Trial objectives and purpose
Trial design
Number of trial participants
Participant selection/withdrawal criteria
Participant treatment
Safety and efficacy assessments
Quality control/quality assurance
Adverse event reporting requirements (See the Safety Reporting section for additional information)
Statistics and methods to track trial data
Sponsor specifications for direct access to source data/documents
Ethical considerations
Data management and recordkeeping
Financing and insurance details
Publication policy
Supplements
Information about each research facility in Thailand
Number of institutions participating in the research in Thailand
Other countries where the research project is being conducted
IMPs to be used
For complete protocol requirements, refer to ClinImprtOrdr and Annex 6 of G-ResEthics, which is directly based upon the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) and the ICH guideline Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (THA-27). Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. Both of these ICH guidelines are also referenced in G-ResEthics.

G-CT-DIPApp also provides protocol synopsis requirements for submission to the Thai FDA. Please refer to G-CT-DIPApp for detailed information.

In the instance of a multicenter clinical trial, G-ResEthics indicates that protocols submitted to each institutional EC should contain the same content and should specify the quality control techniques to ensure that the research practices are the same in each institution.

See THA-13 for ECMOPH protocol submission requirements, and see THA-37 and THA-95 for CREC requirements. See also THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

ClinImprtOrdr specifies that a drug import license application for clinical research purposes is submitted to the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) after the research project and all the research sites have been approved by the ethics committee (EC), or in parallel, pending review by at least one (1) EC involved in the study. Per ClinSampleProd and DrugProdReqs, the application to produce drug samples for the registration of drug formulas for human research studies must also be submitted to the Thai FDA either after the research project and all the research sites have been approved by an EC, or in parallel, pending review by at least one (1) EC involved in the study.

Regulatory Authority Approval

As specified in THA-78, the Thai FDA has 60 working days to evaluate an application to import or order drugs in the country for clinical research (N.Y.M.1); 60 working days to evaluate an application to produce drug samples to request modern drug registration for human research studies (P.Y.8); 20 working days to review an application to amend a N.Y.M.1 or P.Y.8 submission; one (1) working day to review an application for a certificate of pharmaceutical product (Certificate of Pharmaceutical Product/Certificate of Free Sale); and 30 working days to evaluate the accuracy and translation of a Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) assessment report from a Thai version to an English version.

Per G-CT-DIPApp, upon receipt of an application package, the Thai FDA’s One Stop Service & Consultation Center (OSSC) (THA-35) sends the application package to an officer in the Thai FDA’s International Affairs and Investigational Drug Section. The officer then screens the package for completeness and informs the eligible sponsor of the results within five (5) working days from the date the application was received. If deemed complete, the officer sends the package to the assigned technical reviewer to proceed. If the officer finds the package to be incomplete, a “Screening Result Notification form” will be sent to the applicant or the applicant’s attorney for correction. If the applicant or the applicant’s attorney fails to fully correct the package within five (5) working days, then the Thai FDA will send a rejection letter and return all the documents to the applicant. However, the applicant may later correct or amend the application package and resubmit it to the OSSC. Once the correction is completed, the officer will send the application package to the assigned reviewer to proceed.

Per G-CT-DIPApp, the reviewer then receives the application package and performs a technical assessment. If the reviewer determines the package is technically correct, then it will be forwarded to the Thai FDA’s Secretary-General for approval. If the reviewer finds the application package technically incorrect, then it will be forwarded to the Thai FDA’s Secretary-General for rejection. If the reviewer finds the technical information to be incomplete, then the applicant or the applicant’s attorney will be asked to clarify and/or submit additional documents/information. If the documentation or amended information is not submitted within five (5) working days, the Thai FDA will issue a rejection letter and return the package to the applicant. However, the applicant may resubmit a corrected package to the OSSC (THA-35) (timeline not specified in G-CT-DIPApp). If the applicant can completely correct the application package, the officer will forward the package to the assigned reviewer for re-assessment.

In addition, ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd further specify that once the Thai FDA receives the EC approval documentation, the agency will complete its review within 15 days. See also THA-18 (Appendix 13) and THA-76 (Appendix 9) for the form to submit results of EC review to the Thai FDA. Refer to the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for detailed submission requirements.

Per ExprssChnnl, a request for expedited review of N.Y.M.1 and P.Y.8 applications through an express channel may be submitted to the Thai FDA’s OSSC (THA-35) in the case of a public health emergency. The processing time is 10 days from the date of receipt of the request for entry into the system.

Ethics Committee Approval

The review and approval process by a Thai FDA recognized EC will vary by institution. However, according to THA-13, which provides the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) requirements, the ECMOPH review and approval process can take between two (2) and three (3) months.

Per G-ResEthics, each EC should establish its own requirements for protocol submission and timeline of review.

According to THA-98, submissions to the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) will be sorted by the secretary within five (5) days. As stated in THA-98 and THA-100, an expedited review will be completed within 10 working days, while a full board review will be completed according to each panel’s schedule. Per THA-100, exemption decisions are also made within 10 working days.

THA-98 and THA-100 indicate that for both types of reviews, the principal investigator (PI) or research coordinator will be informed of the CREC decision within five (5) working days after the decision is made. THA-100 further states that the PI must submit a revised protocol, if applicable, to the CREC according to the committee’s suggestions within three (3) working days. The CREC will review the revised protocol within 10 working days.

Per THA-98, the CREC will also send the result of its review and the approval letter, if applicable, to the local EC by email within five (5) days after the decision is made. CREC review of amendments follows the same timeline, except that expedited review will be completed within five (5) days.

THA-98 further indicates that the CREC Sorting Secretary will send the local EC a local issue assessment form, which the EC must respond to within 10 business days, or one (1) day prior to the meeting in which the research proposal is scheduled to be reviewed. Additionally, THA-98 notes that the PI, research coordinator, or site investigator must submit documents to the local EC per institutional requirements (within 30 days).

See THA-98 and THA-100 for additional information and graphics related to CREC and local EC review timelines.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

In accordance with ClinSampleProd, ClinImprtOrdr, and ECRegProc, a clinical trial can only commence after a sponsor receives approval of a drug import application for clinical research purposes or approval of a request to produce drug samples for human research studies from the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA), as well as approval to conduct the clinical trial from a Thai FDA recognized ethics committee (EC). No waiting period is required following the sponsor’s receipt of these approvals. (See also THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd.)

Additionally, the clinical trial should be conducted in compliance with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28). Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

Clinical Trial Agreement

G-ResEthics and THA-28 require the sponsor to sign a letter of agreement with the participating institution(s) before the trial begins. THA-28 also notes that any agreements between the sponsor and the investigator(s)/institution(s) and any other parties involved with the trial should be in writing either as part of the protocol or in a separate agreement.

Per THA-14, researchers should also abide by research obligations and agreements specified by and entered into with fellow researchers, funding agencies, and their affiliates.

Clinical Trial Registration

The ClinImprtOrdr application document checklist (Appendix 3) includes clinical trial registry information as one (1) of the items to be included in the application submission package, specifying that sponsors may register with either the Thai Clinical Trials Registry (TCTR) (THA-31) or a foreign registry. Sponsors may register in more than one (1) location.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

In accordance with ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-AEReptReqs, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Thailand’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a research participant to whom a drug product was administered, and which does not necessarily bear a causal relationship to the treatment
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – All dangerous and adverse reactions resulting from any dose of an investigational drug, for which it is at least reasonably likely that the adverse reaction is attributable to the drug being studied, that is, a relationship cannot be ruled out
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or is a congenital anomaly/birth defect
Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR) – An unexpected SAE/SADR given the nature of the research procedures and the population being studied
Unexpected Adverse Event/Adverse Drug Reaction – A reaction where the nature or severity is inconsistent with the applicable product information
Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. THA-28 also notes that the ICH Guideline for Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (THA-26) should be referenced for additional safety terms not defined in this list.

Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

As stated in G-AEReptReqs, the principal investigator (PI) is responsible for reporting all SAEs/SADRs to the sponsor and the ethics committee (EC) no later than 24 hours after the PI becomes aware of the event. The PI must also report all AEs/ADRs to the sponsor and the EC no later than seven (7) calendar days following first knowledge.

For safety reporting requirements specific to the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) and the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC), please see THA-13 and THA-37 respectively.

Sponsor Responsibilities

As delineated in THA-28, sponsors who are permitted to import or order drugs for research in Thailand and those who are licensed to produce drug samples for human research studies, must comply with the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA)’s safety monitoring and reporting requirements. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd state that the following information is viewed as urgent and is required to be reported:

SAEs/SADRs that never occurred before because the research team used safety reporting information from other countries to substantiate investigational product (IP) use
Other safety and security information useful to evaluating IP risk-benefit assessment, IP changes to the method of administration, or changes required to the overall research process
Unexpected SAE/SADR incidents that never occurred before, with an increased incidence or severity and considered to be of clinical importance
Significant harm to the participant, such as the ineffectiveness of an IP used to treat a life-threatening disease
Significant new information about experimental animal safety studies, such as carcinogenicity
Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, an ADR report must be filed in the following specified timelines:

Unexpected SAEs/SADRs that are fatal or life-threatening must be reported to the Thai FDA within seven (7) days from the first knowledge of the incident’s occurrence. Any additional relevant information should be sent within eight (8) days of the initial report
Unexpected SAEs/SADRs that are not fatal or life-threatening must be reported to the Thai FDA within 15 days from the date of SAE/SADR notification. A report must also be submitted periodically with any additional information.
AEs/ADRs that occur following the research participant’s participation in the study or after the study has been completed must be reported within 15 days from first knowledge of the event
According to G-AEReptReqs and G-ResEthics, the sponsor is also required to report all SUSARs to the EC as soon as possible, but no later than seven (7) calendar days for all fatal or life-threatening events, and no later than 15 calendar days for any non-fatal or non-life-threatening events. The sponsor must include the main points of concern. In addition, the sponsor must report to the EC any other non-local adverse reactions that may increase risks to participants within 15 days. Additionally, the sponsor must report any non-local SAEs/SADRs including SUSARs at least every six (6) months to the EC.

G-ResEthics and THA-28 state that the sponsor is responsible for expediting the reporting of all SUSARs to the investigator(s)/institution(s) participating in the trial, the EC(s), and to the Thai FDA. These reports should comply with G-AEReptReqs and the ICH Guideline for Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (THA-26). See G-AEReptReqs for detailed reporting requirements for the investigator and sponsor.

Other Safety Reports

THA-28 indicates that the sponsor should submit to the Thai FDA all safety updates and periodic reports as required by applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor is also responsible for the ongoing safety evaluation of investigational drug(s) and should promptly notify all concerned parties of findings that could adversely impact the safety of research participants, the conduct of the trial, or alter the EC’s approval or favorable opinion to continue the trial.

Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, annual and end of study safety reports must be provided to the New Drugs and Drug Research Promotion Group within the Thai FDA’s Medicines Regulation Division. The annual report must be submitted as a document within three (3) months of the one (1) year anniversary of the study, and the final safety report must be submitted as a document within six (6) months after the study has concluded. In addition, a list of all SAE/SADR incidents involving research participant(s) should be included in the annual report. A detailed summary table with the number of SAEs/SADRs organized by terminology (symptoms and diagnosis) should be provided. See Appendix 21 in ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 21 in THA-18) and Appendix 17 in ClinSampleProd (Appendix 17 in THA-76) for an example of the reporting form.

ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd further note that other reports must be made in writing with information such as summary of risk assessment issues and related details for submission to the New Drugs and Drug Research Promotion Group.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

Pursuant to ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, individual reports should be submitted electronically via the Thai FDA’s Health Product Vigilance Center (HPVC) (THA-30), unless the system is unavailable. The report may also be submitted as a document to the New Drugs and Drug Research Promotion Group within the Thai FDA’s Medicines Regulation Division (see THA-22).

Individual report data should include at minimum the following information:

Research participant information for those that can be identified (e.g., participant codes)
Investigational drugs used in research study
AE/ADR symptoms or results suspected of being connected to the drugs
Source of follow-up reports
Research project code or name
Reporting numbers (e.g., report number specified by sponsor)
Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, for research studies involving participants whose identities are disclosed, submitted AE/ADR reports should include the participant codes unless the Thai FDA’s Office of the Board of Directors deems it necessary to reveal the code immediately.

As per G-AEReptReqs, PIs should report all local SAEs to the sponsor and use the same form (specified by the sponsor) when reporting to the EC. Sponsors should report local SUSARs to the EC using the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS)’ form (THA-20).

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

As delineated in G-ResEthics, the investigator(s) must submit progress reports on the status of the trial to the ethics committee (EC) at the designated interval (not specified). For high-risk research protocols, investigator(s) should report the progress more frequently than for a low-risk protocol. The investigator should also provide a proposed schedule to submit a progress report to the EC from the date of protocol submission for ethical review, which should be at least once a year.

The International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) further notes that investigator(s) should submit a research summary report in writing to the EC once a year, or more often, as required by the EC. Investigator(s) should send a written report to the EC and the institution, if applicable, regarding any changes that may impact the research process and/or cause increased risk to the research participants. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

In addition, according to ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, the sponsor must submit a study progress report annually to the Director of the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA)'s Medicines Regulation Division between October 1 and 31 every year until the study ends. Per ClinImprtOrdr, for N.Y.M.1/investigational product (IP) import applications, this report should be submitted using the progress report form in Appendix 15 in THA-18, and accompanied by a delivery letter to the Thai FDA’s Director of the Bureau of Medicine using the format in Appendix 14 in THA-18. Per ClinSampleProd, for P.Y.8/IP sample production applications, the report should be submitted using the progress report form in Appendix 11 in THA-76, and accompanied by a delivery letter to the Thai FDA’s Director of the Bureau of Medicine using the format in Appendix 10 in THA-76.

Requests that already have information in the FDA’s Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54) must submit documents according to the system’s procedures. See Submission Process section for detailed information on submitting information via THA-54.

The ExprssChnnl indicates that for N.Y.M.1 and P.Y.8 applications reviewed through the express channel in the case of a public health emergency, reporting on the progress of research operations must be submitted monthly from the date of receiving permission. See the Scope of Assessment section for more information on the express channel.

Final Report

As specified in ClinImprtOrdr, in the event of early termination of the research study, the sponsor must submit a summary report (Appendix 19 of ClinImprtOrdr) to the Thai FDA within 60 days after the closeout of the last study site.

G-ResEthics also requires investigator(s) to submit a final report to the EC upon the trial’s termination.

For reporting requirements specific to the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH), please see THA-13. Also, refer to THA-37 for Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) reporting requirements. The ECMOPH and the CREC are both ECs recognized by the Thai FDA to review and approve clinical trial protocols.

Individual ECs should be contacted to confirm their specific requirements.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
In accordance with G-ResEthics, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), a sponsor is defined as an individual, company, institution, or organization that takes responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a clinical trial. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

Per G-ResEthics and THA-28, the Thai government also permits a sponsor to authorize a contract research organization (CRO) to perform one (1) or more of a sponsor’s trial-related duties and functions. However, the ultimate responsibility for the trial data’s quality and integrity always resides with the sponsor. Any trial-related responsibilities to be transferred and assumed by a CRO should be specified in a written agreement or contract. A sponsor may be domestic or foreign.

Per THA-65 and THA-77, although applicants residing outside Thailand cannot register directly with Digital ID (THA-89), they can request permission to authorize a juristic person who receives power of attorney to use the OSSC’s online consultation system (E-Consult) (THA-77) and to submit applications to the FDA’s Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54).

THA-28 also states that the sponsor may be a sponsor-investigator if the individual both initiates and conducts, alone or with others, a clinical trial, and under whose immediate direction the investigational product is administered or dispensed. The sponsor-investigator’s obligations include both those of a sponsor and those of an investigator.

According to THA-13, the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) requires the sponsor and/or CRO to be legally registered in Thailand. The ECMOPH is one (1) of the ethics committees approved by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) to approve clinical research protocols. See THA-13 for additional ECMOPH sponsor requirements.

Per ClinImprtOrdr, the sponsor is also referred to as the applicant or importer, and in ClinSampleProd, the sponsor is also referred to as applicant.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

In accordance with G-ResEthics and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical trial, and for ensuring that the investigator(s) are qualified by training and experience. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. THA-14 also states that researchers must have basic knowledge in the field of research.

Additionally, per THA-28 and G-ResEthics, the sponsor must define and allocate all study related duties and responsibilities to the relevant parties participating in the study. Prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s) and the institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and an investigator’s brochure.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

No information is available regarding foreign sponsor regulatory requirements.

Data Safety Monitoring Board

Although not specified as a sponsor requirement, G-ResEthics, G-AEReptReqs, and THA-28 encourage the establishment of a Data Safety Monitoring Board.

Multicenter Studies

As delineated in G-ResEthics and THA-28, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor, and if required, by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA), and are given ethics committee approval
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication between investigators is facilitated
Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Insurance

ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd specify that financing and insurance information should be included in the study protocol and protocol summary. If not included in the protocol and research project summary, a financial/insurance agreement should be attached separately in the application package as one (1) of the documents that the ethics committee (EC) considers approved or certified (e.g., Patient Information Sheets, etc.). G-ResEthics also states that the sponsor should provide insurance or indemnify the investigator/institution against claims arising from the trial, except for claims that arise from malpractice and/or negligence, if required by applicable regulatory requirements.

Compensation

Injury or Death

As specified in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), the sponsor or the designated contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for providing information related to compensation in the event of trial-related injuries or death to research participants and/or their legal heirs. ClinImprtOrdr further states that payment of compensation (if any) will be determined on a monthly basis to participants involved in the research. (See THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr.)

Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. The sponsor must also inform the participants of any available medical treatment in the event of trial-related injuries. MCEthics further indicates that medical practitioners are responsible for harm or damage because the research studies involving the participant were not the fault of the participant.

Trial Participation

As per G-ResEthics, Phase I trial participants should be compensated for travel, loss of work, or other expenses incurred while participating in the trial.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As stated in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and G-ResEthics, the sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)'s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28). Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

G-ResEthics and THA-28 explain that the sponsor is required to obtain agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities.

G-ResEthics and THA-28 further specify that the sponsor must also obtain the investigator(s) and the institution(s) agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with THA-28, applicable regulatory requirement(s), and the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and approved by the ethics committee (EC)
Comply with data recording and reporting procedures
License monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain essential documents until the sponsor informs them that they are no longer needed
Any agreements should be made in writing and the sponsor should sign the protocol or a separate agreement.

Pursuant to G-ResEthics and THA-28, QC should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been correctly processed. In addition, per THA-28, the sponsor should focus on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should also use a risk-based approach that includes:

During protocol development, identify processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results (Critical Process and Data Identification)
Identify risks to critical trial processes and data (Risk Identification)
Evaluate the identified risks against existing risk controls (Risk Evaluation)
Decide which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept (Risk Control)
Document quality management activities and communicate to those involved in or affected by these activities (Risk Communication)
Periodically review risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant (Risk Review)
In the clinical study report, describe the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarize important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken (Risk Reporting)
ClinImprtOrdr states that the trial must be conducted in accordance with the Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) principles.

Monitoring Requirements

G-ResEthics and THA-28 note that the sponsor may choose to perform a clinical trial audit as part of its QA system. The purpose of the audit should be to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, and other applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor should ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience, and the auditor’s qualifications should be documented. The sponsor must also ensure that the audit is conducted in accordance with the SOPs, the auditor observations are documented, and data are available as needed for the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA). No specific timeframe is provided for the audit process.

Per ClinImprtOrdr, the sponsor and investigator must facilitate the Thai FDA’s monitoring of the clinical trial to ensure compliance with GCP, GLP, safety reporting, and progress reporting requirements.

In addition, per THA-28, the sponsor should develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The extent and nature of monitoring is flexible and permits varied approaches that improve effectiveness and efficiency. The sponsor may choose onsite monitoring, a combination of onsite and centralized monitoring, or, where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan). See THA-28 for detailed information on the sponsor’s role in developing monitoring systems.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

G-ResEthics and THA-28 state that if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor should promptly inform the investigators/institutions and the regulatory authority(ies) of the termination or suspension and the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. The sponsor or the investigator/institution should also promptly inform the EC and provide the reasons for the study’s termination or suspension.

G-CT-DIPApp also specifies that in the event of the premature discontinuance of a trial, the Thai FDA must be notified no later than 30 working days after the date of discontinuance. G-CT-DIPApp further notes that a corresponding notification letter referring to the related approved import license along with supplemental documents as indicated in Appendix 13 is needed, and a corresponding notification letter along with supplemental documents as indicated in Appendix 14 is needed. (Note: Appendices 13 and 14 as referenced in G-CT-DIPApp are only available in the ClinImprtOrdr.) As stated in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, at the conclusion or termination of a clinical trial, a summary report must also be submitted within 60 days after the closeout of the last study site. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd further explain that details of remaining medicines to be destroyed and evidence supporting the destruction or return of the study drugs should also be included (Appendix 20 in ClinImprtOrdr and Appendix 16 in ClinSampleProd each contain a sample notification form required to be completed when terminating a research project). (See also THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr.)

Per G-CT-DIPApp, after the import license is granted, the applicant must also notify the Thai FDA when the clinical trial has been discontinued in its entirety or at any clinical trial site for reasons not related to the safety of clinical trial, or if the trial has been discontinued prematurely.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

Per G-ResEthics and THA-28, when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor must ensure that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance, and that standard operating procedures are maintained for using these systems. Per THA-28, the sponsor’s approach to validate such systems should be based on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use and the potential of the system to affect participant protection and reliability of trial results. Refer to G-ResEthics and THA-28 for detailed information on electronic trial data systems. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd also note that sponsors should ensure that research facilities are prepared for inspections by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) by ensuring that research participant source data and case report forms are stored in electronically based data collection systems.

Records Management

As set forth in G-ResEthics and THA-28, sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application in an International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) region, until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications, or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of an investigational product’s clinical development. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed.

In addition, THA-28 states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Responsible Parties

The PDPA defines the “data controller” as the person or juristic person having the power and duties to make decisions regarding the collection, use, or disclosure of the personal data.

Data Protection

Per the PDPA, the data controller must ensure that collected personal data remains accurate, up-to-date, complete, and not misleading. Personal data collection must be limited to the extent necessary in relation to the lawful purpose of the data controller. The data controller’s purpose for collecting data must meet one (1) of the purposes specified in the PDPA in order to be permitted to collect personal data, with the data subject’s explicit consent (see Section 23 of PDPA for details).

PDPA further specifies that personal data includes health and genetic data and requires the data subject’s explicit consent. Permissible personal data collection includes data collected in the interest of public health, such as protecting against cross-border dangerous contagious diseases or epidemics which may be contagious or pestilent, or ensuring standards or quality of medicines, medicinal products, or medical devices, provided there are measures to safeguard the rights and freedom of the data subject, including the confidentiality of personal data. Additionally, in the event that the data controller sends or transfers personal data to a foreign country, the destination country or international organization that receives such personal data must have an adequate data protection standard, and must be carried out in accordance with the rules for personal data protection as prescribed by the Personal Data Protection Committee (PDPC). See PDPC-Estab for additional information on the PDPC. Refer to the PDPA for a detailed list of permissible data collection purposes.

As set forth in the PDPA, the data controller is responsible for the following duties:

To provide appropriate security measures for preventing the unauthorized or unlawful loss, access to, use, alteration, correction, or disclosure of personal data; such measures must be reviewed when necessary, or when technology has changed in order to efficiently maintain proper security and safety, and also comply with the minimum standard specified by the PDPC
In the case of personal data being provided to other persons or legal persons other than the data controller, the data controller must take action to prevent such person(s) from using or disclosing the personal data unlawfully or without authorization
Establish an examination system for personal data erasure or destruction when the retention period ends, when the personal data is irrelevant or beyond the purpose necessary for which it has been collected, when the data subject has requested to do so, or when the data subject withdraws consent, except where the retention of such personal data is for the purpose of freedom of expression
Notify the PDPC of any personal data breach without delay and, where feasible, within 72 hours after having become aware of it, unless such breach is unlikely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of the persons whose data have been breached
Refer to the PDPA for additional information on data controller responsibilities. See also PDPC-Breach, G-PDPBreaches, THA-15, THA-10, and THA-17 for data controller guidelines on assessing data breach risks and applicable PDPC reporting requirements.

As described in the PDPA, with regard to personal data record management, the data controller must maintain, at least, the following records in order to enable the data subject and the PDPC to monitor in either written or electronic form the following: the collected personal data; the purpose of the collection of personal data; data controller details; personal data retention period; rights and methods for access to the personal data, including the conditions regarding the person’s right to access their personal data and the conditions to access such data; personal data use or disclosure; rejection of or objection to a request for personal data; and details of the appropriate personal data security measures.

Per the PDPA, the data protection legislation states that a data protection officer must be designated in the event the data controller/data processor is deemed a public authority per the PDPC; if the activities of the data controller/data processor in the collection, use, or disclosure of personal data, or the system itself, requires regular monitoring, due to the large quantity of personal data; or, if the core activity of the data controller/data processor is the collection, use, or disclosure of personal data for which the explicit consent of the data subject has not been obtained. See the PDPA for guidance related to data protection officers. See also THA-61 for a detailed guidance on the PDPA.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

The PDPA states that the data controller must not collect, use, or disclose personal data, unless the data subject has given consent prior to or at the time of such collection, use, or disclosure, except in the case where the data controller is permitted to do so by the provisions of the PDPA or any other laws. These cases may include the preparation of historical documents or public interest archives, research, or statistics, or preventing or suppressing a danger to a person’s life, body, or health.

The PDPA specifies that a request for consent must be made explicitly in a written statement or via electronic means unless consent cannot be done by those means. In addition, the data controller must inform the data subject of the purpose for collecting, using, or disclosing the subject’s personal data. The request for consent must be presented in an easily accessible and intelligible form and with statements using clear and plain language that is neither deceptive nor misleading to the data subject. The data controller must also ensure that the data subject’s consent is freely given.

The PDPA further explains that the data subject may withdraw consent at any time. The withdrawal of consent must be as easy as giving consent, unless there is a restriction of the withdrawal of consent by law, or the contract which gives benefits to the data subject. However, the withdrawal of consent must not affect the collection, use, or disclosure of personal data that the data subject has already legally consented to. If the withdrawal of consent will affect the data subject in any manner, the data controller must inform the data subject of the consequences of withdrawal.

Refer to the G-PDPConsent for detailed data controller guidance on obtaining consent, and the G-PDPNotif for data controller guidelines on the conditions to be assessed when notifying a data subject of the purpose and details related to collecting their personal data. THA-16 also provides useful information on these guidelines.

Consent for Processing Personal Data of Vulnerable Populations

In the event that the data subject is a minor who is not sui juris by marriage or has no capacity as a sui juris person under the PDPA, the request for consent from such a data subject must be made as follows:

In the event that giving consent is not an action that the minor is entitled to exercise independently, the consent of the holder of parental responsibility over the child must be obtained
Where the minor is below the age of 10 years, the consent must be obtained from the holder of parental responsibility over the child
In the event that the data subject is incompetent, the consent must be obtained from the custodian who has the power to act on behalf of the incompetent person
In the event that the data subject is quasi-incompetent, the consent must be obtained from the curator who has the power to act on behalf of the quasi-incompetent person
The above stated provisions also apply to the withdrawal of data consent of the data subject, the notice given to the data subject, the exercise of rights of the data subject, the complaint of the data subject, and any other acts under the PDPA for the data subject who is a minor, an incompetent person, or a quasi-incompetent person.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Thai clinical trials, a freely given informed consent must be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28). Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. MCEthics further states that a medical practitioner who conducts research studies and human experiments must obtain the consent of the participant and must be ready to protect the participant from harm arising from that experiment.

As per ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, and THA-28, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by an institutional ethics committee (EC) recognized by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA), and provided to the Thai FDA with the drug import license application to conduct a clinical trial. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.) (Note: The ICF is referred to as the Patient Information Sheet in G-CT-DIPApp.) (See also THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr.)

G-ResEthics and THA-28 state that the investigator(s) or the representative(s) must provide detailed research study information to the participant or legal representative/guardian. G-ResEthics and THA-28 also specify that the oral and written information concerning the trial, including the ICF, should be easy to understand and presented without coercion or unduly influencing a potential participant to enroll in the clinical trial. The participant and legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate. THA-11 also explains that patients who seek medical treatment have the right to receive truthful and adequate information about their illness, examination, treatment, advantages and disadvantages from the examination, and treatment from health professionals, in a language that patients can easily understand. Patients can then choose to make decisions about consenting or not consenting to the health professionals treating them, except in cases of urgent and life-threatening emergencies. THA-14 further states that researchers should take pains to explain the objectives and scope of their research to the human participants without deceiving or coercing them and they should not violate their participants’ rights as private individuals. Researchers should respect the rights and dignity of their human participants and enlist their consent prior to any research experiments involving human participants.

As per G-ResEthics and THA-28, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representatives from their liabilities for any negligence.

THA-13 provides informed consent documentation guidelines required by the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH), which is one (1) of the institutional ECs approved by the Thai FDA.

As noted in THA-34, the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) does not have its own ICF template and directs investigators to the template provided by the Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Thailand (FERCIT) (see THA-46 for document links).

Re-Consent

No information is currently available regarding re-consent requirements.

Language Requirements

As stated in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, the ICF content and accompanying information (Patient Information Sheet) should be presented in the participant’s language, must be submitted in Thai and translated to English, and certify that the text in other languages aligns with the Thai translation. G-CT-DIPApp also indicates that the Patient Information Sheet should be presented in Thai.

Documenting Consent

G-ResEthics and THA-28 state that the participant or legal representative/guardian, and the investigator(s) must sign and date the ICF. Where the participant is illiterate, or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, verbal consent should be obtained in the presence of and countersigned by an impartial witness. The NatHlthAct also indicates that the participant’s consent must be obtained in writing prior to conducting the trial.

Waiver of Consent

As per G-ResEthics, the EC should establish the conditions under which an informed consent discussion and/or signing the ICF can be waived. In these cases, the investigator must explore other means to protect the participant’s confidentiality. For example, if the investigator uses information from a participant’s medical records, the investigator must also ensure that the ICF is kept in the medical record by having the participant sign the form in advance and keep it in the records, or by having the participant sign the ICF later. The EC will then consider waiving the informed consent as long as the investigator provides proof that the participant is informed about the method for collecting the data, and that the participant’s privacy is protected.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Based on ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, the G-ResEthics, and the G-CT-DIPApp, the informed consent form (ICF) (also referred to as the Patient Information Sheet in G-CT-DIPApp) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study purpose and objectives
The expected duration of research participant’s involvement in the trial
Experimental aspects of the study
The participant’s responsibilities in participating in the trial
Any expected risks or discomforts to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
Disclosure of alternate procedures or treatments available to participants, including the benefits and risks
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
The research procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The expected benefits that can be obtained from the study; if no benefit is expected, the participant should be made aware of this
Compensation and/or treatment available for the participant in the case of trial-related injury
Payment of compensation (if any) determined on a monthly basis to research participants
Various expenses (if any) for research participants
That participation is voluntary, and that the participant may refuse to participate or withdraw from the study at any time without guilt or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled
That the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA), research investigators, the ethics committee (EC), and regulatory agencies are permitted to directly inspect participant’s original medical records to validate the accuracy of clinical research procedures and/or other information without violating the participant's right to maintain confidentiality beyond the limits allowed by laws and regulations, and that, by signing a written ICF, the participant or legal representative/guardian is authorizing such access
The extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained
That the participant or legal representative/guardian will be notified in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the study which may affect the participant's willingness to continue
Individuals to contact for further information regarding the trial, the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without consent
Estimated number of participants participating in research for the entire project, and the number of participants at each institution in Thailand
THA-13 provides information sheet guidelines required by the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH), which is one (1) of the institutional ethics committees approved by the Thai FDA.

As noted in THA-34, the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) does not have its own ICF template and directs investigators to the template provided by the Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Thailand (FERCIT) (see THA-46 for document links).

See the Vulnerable Populations and Consent for Specimen sections for further information. See also Appendix 11 (Part 4) in THA-18 and Appendix 7 (Part 4) in THA-76 for a checklist of items to be included in the ICF.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

In accordance with G-ResEthics and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), Thailand’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. The Declaration of Rights and Code of Conduct for Patients (THA-11) also states that every patient has the fundamental right to receive professional medical care and health care from health professionals without discrimination as provided for in the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand (B.E. 2560). Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, THA-28, the NatHlthAct, and G-CT-DIPApp, state that a participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) (also referred to as the Patient Information Sheet) and during the informed consent process.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and THA-28, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled. NatHlthAct also states that the participant may withdraw consent at any time. THA-11 similarly states that the patient has the right to be fully informed in order to make a decision to participate or withdraw from being a participant in a health practitioner’s research.

The Right to Information

As delineated in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, the NatHlthAct, G-CT-DIPApp, and THA-28, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study. THA-11 states that patients who seek medical treatment have the right to receive truthful and adequate information about their illness, examination, treatment, advantages and disadvantages from the examination, and treatment from health professionals, in a language that patients can easily understand. Patients can then choose to make decisions about consenting or not consenting to the health professionals treating them, except in cases of urgent and life-threatening emergency.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and THA-28, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. In addition, per G-ResEthics, which incorporates the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki (THA-45), every precaution should be taken to respect the privacy of the participant, the confidentiality of the participant’s information, and to minimize the impacts of the study on the participant. THA-11 further states that unless the patient’s permission or approved legal authorization is obtained, healthcare personnel cannot disclose the patient’s information.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and THA-28 state that the research participant or the legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries. THA-11 similarly indicates that every patient has the right to know the name, surname, and profession of the healthcare personnel in charge.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

G-ResEthics states that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of the participant’s health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society. THA-14 explains that researchers should take full responsibility for the impact and consequences of their research regarding themselves, their research participants, and society at large.

(See the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.)

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Per the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), research participants involved in clinical research under emergency circumstances are viewed as vulnerable and should be provided additional protections to ensure their safety and well-being. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. In addition, per the Declaration of Rights and Code of Conduct for Patients (THA-11), patients who are in a life-threatening condition are entitled to immediate, urgent assistance from a healthcare practitioner as required, regardless of whether the patient requests assistance.

THA-28 explains that in an emergency, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) cannot be obtained from the research participant, the consent of the legal representative/guardian should be obtained. If prior consent cannot be obtained from the legal representative/guardian, the participant’s enrollment should follow measures specified in the protocol, and/or elsewhere, to ensure compliance with ethics committee (EC) and other applicable regulatory requirements. Documented EC approval to protect the participant’s rights, safety, and well-being must also be obtained. The participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible and provide consent. Consent should also continue to be obtained throughout the trial as appropriate per THA-28. However, THA-11 further notes that except in an emergency, every patient has the right to obtain sufficient information regarding their illness from healthcare personnel prior to deciding to allow any treatment.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

As per G-ResEthics and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), in all Thai clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

G-ResEthics characterizes vulnerable populations as those who are dependent on others and are unable to express their opinion freely or make their own decisions. These may include hospitalized patients, prisoners, children, the mentally impaired, critically ill and psychotic patients, pregnant women, and the disadvantaged. THA-28 adds that other vulnerable participants may include drug company employees, soldiers, prisoners, patients with incurable diseases, emergency patients, unemployed or poor people, members of minority groups, the homeless, immigrants, and young people who are unable to give consent on their own.

The G-ResEthics specifies that trials involving vulnerable persons must meet the following requirements:

Irrefutable rationale for conducting research clearly explained in the protocol
Precautions against possible physical and mental harms exercised
Appropriate research procedures used
Ensure that, as applicable, the participant’s parents or legal representative/guardian are fully informed about the study
Proof that the participants are voluntarily participating in the study
Ensure that the possible risks should not be greater than minimal when a study will not have a direct health benefit to the vulnerable group, unless the ethics committee permits a greater than minimal risk study to be conducted
See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
According to the ThaiCode, a person ceases to be a minor and attains majority at 20 years of age, or if the person gets married before age 20. THA-13 and THA-92 indicate that the age suitable to give consent is 18 years or older. The Declaration of Rights and Code of Conduct for Patients (THA-11) also indicates that a child is someone under 18 years of age.

As set forth in G-ResEthics, when the research participant is a minor, informed consent should be obtained from the parents, guardians, or legal representatives. Additionally, precautions against possible physical and mental harms should be exercised. Furthermore, the rights of the minors should be respected for their voluntary decision to participate in a clinical study. THA-11 similarly indicates that parents or legal guardians may exercise their rights on behalf of a child patient who is not over 18 years of age.

The International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) states that when a clinical trial includes minors, the minor should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with the minor’s understanding and, if capable, the minor should sign and personally date the written informed consent. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

Assent Requirements

THA-13 specifies that assent is required for minors seven (7) through 18 years of age. Different assent forms should be created for the following age groups: seven (7) to 13 and over 13 until 18. However, as per THA-92, the principles of requesting informed consent in children are as follows:

For children under seven (7) years old, a consent form must be obtained from the parents/guardians
For children seven (7) to 12 years old, an assent form in language that is easy for the child to understand must be obtained along with a consent form from the parents/guardians
For children 13 to 17 years old, a consent form must be obtained from the child and the parents/guardians (the consent form is the same for each party)
Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
As per G-ResEthics, any Thai clinical studies involving pregnant women and fetuses require additional safeguards to ensure that the research conforms to appropriate ethical standards and upholds societal values. Adequate information on the safety and impacts to the fetus should also be made available.

In addition, the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) indicates that the informed consent form should include a statement on the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
According to G-ResEthics, prisoners are considered vulnerable because incarceration could affect their ability to make a voluntary decision regarding participation in research. A research study involving prisoners should ensure that these prospective participants are informed and are given the opportunity to make their own decisions without any interference from a higher authority.

Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), which includes prisoners in its description of vulnerable populations.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Per G-ResEthics, informed consent should be obtained from the legal representatives or guardians of participants for studies involving psychiatric or mentally incapacitated patients. The Declaration of Rights and Code of Conduct for Patients (THA-11) also states that parents or legal representatives may exercise their rights on behalf of a physically or mentally handicapped child patient who cannot exercise their rights on their own.

As further explained in MentalHlthAct, any research to be conducted with patients who are mentally impaired have the right to:

Receive treatment according to medical standards that protect human dignity
Have information about their illness and treatment kept confidential other than what is required to be disclosed by law
Sign an ethics committee (EC) approved consent form prior to participation
Receive equal access to state health insurance and social security systems
In addition, MentalHlthAct prohibits disclosure of health information of mentally impaired participants in a manner that may damage the individual, except in the event that the patient or others may be in danger, for public safety, or specific laws require this information to be disclosed.

MentalHlthAct also states that any research involving patients who are mentally impaired can only be performed after obtaining their consent, EC approval, and approval from other relevant authorities to conduct the study. The patient’s approval may be revoked at any time. Treatment may only be administered once the patient has been informed as to why the treatment is necessary and provided with the details and benefits prior to giving consent. In the case of a patient under 18 years old, or one who lacks the ability to make decisions, the patient’s parent or legal guardian should provide consent. If the patient is to be admitted to a public hospital or treatment facility, signed consent is necessary. Research is permitted in the case of patients with mental impairments who are either facing dangerous conditions or compulsory treatment is required.

In addition, the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) indicates that when a clinical trial includes participants who can only be enrolled in the trial with the consent of the participant’s legal representative/guardian (e.g., those with severe dementia), the participant should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with the participant’s understanding and, if capable, the participant should sign and personally date the written informed consent. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
In accordance with G-ResEthics and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), an investigational product is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes a product with a marketing authorization when it is used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form, when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

G-ResEthics states that an investigational drug used in a clinical trial falls into one (1) of four (4) categories:

New drugs
Unregistered drugs in Thailand
Drugs registered by the national drug authority, but being studied in new doses or indications not previously approved
Locally produced drugs that require efficacy testing
Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Manufacturing

According to the DrugAct, ClinSampleProd, and ClinImprtOrdr, the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) in Thailand. The Thai FDA will approve the manufacture of an IP after the clinical trial application has been approved.

As explained in ClinSampleProd, the Thai FDA’s approval of a request to manufacture drug samples for investigational purposes is obtained using the P.Y.8 form (ClinSampleProd (Appendix 1) or THA-76 (Appendix 1)).

ClinSampleProd specifies that the following information must be included with the P.Y.8 form (Appendix 1):

Detailed list of manufactured drugs
Appearance and color of medicine
Number or quantity to be produced
Quantity of drug ingredients (must be reported in metric units or in a percentage)
Packaging size (packaging details)
Specifying if drug samples are for human research studies or cases other than human research studies
Drug label (two (2) copies)
Medicine package document (two (2) copies)
Other documents in the case of producing drug samples for human research studies
See also the Appendix 6 (Evidence of Drug Quality Information) in ClinSampleProd and (THA-76 (Appendix 6)) for additional requirements included on this form.

ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr, also state that the IP must be manufactured in accordance with good manufacturing practice (GMP) guidelines.

In addition, per ClinSampleProd, following the Thai FDA’s approval to manufacture IP samples, the applicant must also obtain approval prior to implementing changes in the following categories:

Changes that must be notified
Changes that require a change request to be submitted before proceeding, and
Changes that require a new production permit request to be submitted
ClinSampleProd indicates that when the change complies with one (1) of the listed categories, the applicant should:

Prepare documents and evidence according to the document self-check form for requesting changes using the Appendix 13 form or THA-76 (Appendix 13)
Submit a request to amend the details regarding permission using the Appendix 14 form or THA-76 (Appendix 14) (1 set)
Per ClinSampleProd, along with the Appendix 14 form, the applicant should attach relevant documents showing the revised section(s) and one (1) set of power of attorney documentation for each paper submission. ClinSampleProd notes that one (1) request can only change one (1) main issue. For example, in the case of requesting to extend the validity of medicines, this is a change in quality and results in a new expiration date label to be submitted in one (1) request. Additionally, for amendment requests that refer to information already submitted via the FDA’s Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54), the applicant must submit documents according to the system's procedures.

For changes that require the Thai FDA’s Medicines Regulation Division to be notified, ClinSampleProd states that the applicant should submit a letter of explanation, refer to the sample drug production license for human research studies that has been received, and attach related documents showing the revised sections or other information that needs to be notified as detailed in the Appendix 15 form or THA-76 (Appendix 15).

Import

As delineated in ClinImprtOrdr, the Thai FDA is also responsible for authorizing the import of IPs. The Thai FDA’s approval of a drug import license application for clinical research purposes serves as the import license using the N.Y.M.1 form (ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 2) and THA-18 (Appendix 2)). Per DrugImprtRules-1989 and DrugImprtRules-2009, all requests approved by the Thai FDA to order or import drugs into the country for research purposes are exempt from registration.

According to ClinImprtOrdr and THA-18, the following documents are also required to be submitted to the Thai FDA:

Import license application/N.Y.M.1 (ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 2) and THA-18 (Appendix 2))
Summary of research project in Thai
Ethics committee (EC) approval letter
Patient Information Sheet in Thai
Complete research project details in Thai or English
Drug labels for every package size in Thai or English
Drug documentation (for drug formulas that have already been registered)
Investigator’s brochure (IB) (for drugs not yet registered)
Pharmaceutical quality control and production documents
Drug name(s) (including dosage form, quantity, and details of every packaging size)
ClinImprtOrdr also states that the quantity of the IP must be calculated based on the number of study participants of each institute for the whole study duration in accordance with the information in the study protocol. The amount of the IP cannot exceed 20% to cover drug damage. Please refer to ClinImprtOrdr for more detailed IP supply requirements.

In addition, per G-CT-DIPApp, after the import license is granted, the applicant must inform or request permission from the Thai FDA prior to initiating the following:

Changes to clinical trial drug supplies
Changes to an approved protocol (protocol amendment) or changes related to or affecting participant safety
In cases where the sponsor is required to immediately make one (1) or more amendments because the clinical trial or the use of IP in the trial endangers the health of a clinical trial participant or other person, the applicant may immediately make the amendment without prior review by the Thai FDA. A corresponding notification clearly identifying the change and the rationale for immediate implementation of the change must be filed within 15 working days after the amendment implementation date. A corresponding notification letter referring to the related approved import license (see ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 2) and THA-18 (Appendix 2) for N.Y.M.1 form), along with supplemental documents as stated in Appendix 12, are also required. (Note: The Additional Amendment/Clarification Request Form referenced in G-CT-DIPApp as Appendix 12 is only available in ClinImprtOrdr and THA-18 (Appendix 12))
Furthermore, per G-CT-DIPApp, after the import license is granted, the applicant must also notify the Thai FDA in the following cases:

Changes to the protocol that do not affect the safety of the trial participants
When the clinical trial has been discontinued in its entirety or at any clinical trial site for reasons not related to the safety of clinical trial participants
IB changes
Chemistry and manufacturing or quality changes that do not affect drug quality or safety
Premature discontinuation of a trial (See the Risk & Quality Management section for detailed notification requirements)
See the Scope of Assessment section for more information on N.Y.M.1 applications and the Regulatory Fees section for information on IP import fees. See also the Submission Process section for instructions on submitting a drug import waiver request to the Thai FDA.

The DrugAct states that a license will remain valid until December 31st of the year of issue. The license holder who would like to renew the license must file an application for renewal prior to the license expiration date. Once the renewal application has been filed, the license holder may continue to conduct business unless the renewal request is denied. A license holder whose license has expired for not more than one (1) month may file an exemption indicating the reason for obtaining a license extension. However, an application renewal request submitted after one (1) month from the date of license expiration is not permitted. In the event that the Thai FDA does not issue or grant a license renewal request, the applicant may appeal in writing to the Minister within 30 days from the date of receiving the notice rejecting the request. The applicant may obtain a temporary license to operate the business until a final decision is issued by the Minister.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Investigator's Brochure

In accordance with ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), the sponsor or the designated contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for providing the investigators with an Investigator’s Brochure (IB). The IB must contain all of the relevant information on the investigational product(s) (IPs) obtained through the earlier research phases, including preclinical, toxicological, safety, efficacy, and adverse events data. The sponsor should also update the IB as significant new information becomes available. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd further state that the IB should comply with the current version of THA-28. Per ClinImprtOrdr, the sponsor is also referred to as the applicant or importer.

As specified in G-ResEthics, ClinImprtOrdr, and ClinSampleProd, and in accordance with THA-28, the IB must provide coverage of the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation parameters
Non-clinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects of IP in humans (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; regulatory and post marketing experiences)
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator(s)
Bibliography
See Section 7 of THA-28 for detailed content guidelines.

ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd also indicate that evidence must be provided that the IB has been submitted to the ethics committee. In addition, per G-CT-DIPApp, the applicant must notify the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) of changes to the IB after the import license is granted.

Quality Management

ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd also state that the IP must be manufactured in accordance with good manufacturing practice (GMP) guidelines.

As stated in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and the DrugAct, the Thai FDA requires the manufacturer to provide the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Evidence of manufacture under conditions compliant with current GMPs
A Certificate of Analysis for each batch of IPs (must be in Thai if the manufacturer is foreign)
A drug registered in a foreign country is required to have a Certificate of Product (CPP)/Certificate of Free Sale (CFS)/evidence of registration from the Drug Control Department from that country and certified by a qualified translator
A Certificate of Free Sale
In the case that the product is approved for marketing authorization in Thailand, provide a copy of the certificate of drug registration and evidence that the imported drug and the registered drug are produced by the same manufacturer
Per G-CT-DIPApp, the chemistry, manufacturing and control (CMC) information for an IP submission to the Thai FDA must comply with specific requirements for a new chemical entity. Depending on the phase of the clinical trial, the completed CMC template, as well as the following additional quality information as outlined in the template, must be submitted (Note: The appendices referenced in G-CT-DIPApp are only available as Appendices 7 and 8 in the ClinImprtOrdr and Appendices 7 and 8 in THA-18.)

Additionally, per ClinImprtOrdr, in cases where an applicant submits “Drug quality control and production documents” for drug formulas registered in Thailand, the drug documentation approved by the Thai FDA must be used. When the “Drug quality control and production documents” are for drug formulas registered in other countries, the drug documentation of the specific country should be used. If the documentation is in a language other than English, it should be translated to Thai or English, and certified that the text in other languages matches the Thai/English language. See Appendix 7 of ClinImprtOrdr or THA-18 (Appendix 7) for additional information.

Per G-CT-DIPApp, after the import license is granted, the applicant must also notify the Thai FDA of chemistry and manufacturing or quality changes that do not affect drug quality or safety.

See also THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd.

Refer to the Product Management section for additional information on IP supply, storage, and handling requirements, and the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for detailed application requirements.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Thailand must comply with the requirements set forth in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28). Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. G-ResEthics and THA-28 state that the IP must be coded and labeled in a manner that protects blinding, if applicable. In addition, per G-CT-DIPApp, if a drug product is registered in Thailand, a certified copy of a certificate(s) of drug registration by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) must be submitted.

ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and G-CT-DIPApp specify that in general, primary and secondary labels must contain (at least) the following requirements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

All containers and packaging of all sizes are to use the same format as the actual label
Thai language should be used, except for the drug name/drug code and research project sponsor information, where Thai or English language may be used; in the case of drugs administered by medical study personnel, the label information may be submitted in Thai or English
Drug name/drug code, strength, pharmaceutical form, drug delivery system, unit quantity; in the case of a blind treatment study, the label must specify: “Placebo or [Drug Name/Drug Code] + [Strength]”
Research project code or name
Production model and/or code number to identify components and packaging process
Participant number or treatment number and appointment number (if applicable)
Methods of drug use may refer to documentation specifically describing participants (such as drug use records) or to communicate how medical study personnel can correctly administer the drug product
Name, address, and telephone of the sponsor, contract research organization (CRO), or the investigator (main point of contact for clinical research product information and emergency treatment disclosure), unless the participant receives an identification card displaying this information (with attached documents) and is advised to keep this document in their possession at all times
Statement indicating “for clinical research purposes only” or in other words with the same meaning in the Thai language
Drug storage conditions
Period of use (use as appropriate within the expiration date or retest date) in months/years and in a manner that avoids ambiguity
Statement indicating “keep out of the reach of children” in Thai or in other words meaning the same in Thai, unless the participant is not going to take home the medicine
As described in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, primary labels where the primary packaging is always combined with the secondary packaging, should consist of (at least) the following:

Drug name/drug code, strength, pharmaceutical form, drug delivery system (the dosing route may not be established for the oral solid dosage form), unit quantity, in the case of blind treatment study, specify: “placebo or [drug name/drug code] + [strength]"
Research project code or name
Production model and/or code number to identify the components and packaging procedure
Participant number or treatment number and appointment number (if applicable)
Sponsor/CRO/investigator name
Refer to ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd for additional primary label requirements.

Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, drug labeling must be carried out in a facility licensed to manufacture drugs and in accordance with the DrugProdReqs (see Appendix 12). As indicated in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, in cases where drug preparation for administration at a research site requires the application of new labels to the packaging used for administration (e.g., preparing or mixing injections, preparing drugs for immediate oral administration), the applicant must ensure that the principal investigator (PI) or designee:

Prepare label(s) or label image(s) with appropriate and accurate information for the purposes of the research project
Prepare a standard operating procedure (SOP) manual or a standardized method for preparing drugs and labeling drugs in accordance with current drug manufacturing practices and procedures
Ensure the SOPs are administered by a pharmacist or other health professional at the research site who has received appropriate training
Provide evidence to document that practices have been inspected by a second party under strict labeling control
Preserve evidence and record various related documents to support inspection by the authorized person or the Medicines Regulation Division
The applicant is not required to submit labels in this case with the application, but must ensure that the PI or designee complies with these requirements and is always available for inspection or inspection of the research.

Per ClinImprtOrdr, for labels on drugs authorized for importation or ordering into Thailand for research purposes and that have been submitted to the Medicines Regulation Division, the applicant may refer to the original application document if there is no change from the original submission. As described in ClinImprtOrdr, in the case of a request to change the information on the duration of drug use, an additional label indicating the new date and using the original production version should be added. The new label(s) or label image(s) should be submitted in the same format as the original label used, which may cover the original date. However, the new label must not cover the original production version for quality control reasons, and the labeling must be performed at a facility licensed to manufacture the drugs.

Similarly, per ClinSampleProd, for drug labels previously submitted to the Medicines Regulation Division to produce drug samples for human research studies, the applicant may refer to the original document, if it has not been amended. Additionally, the requirements for requesting a change to the period of use on the drug label also follow the same requirements as those delineated for ClinImprtOrdr.

Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, if necessary, the applicant may request that the Medicines Regulation Division consider a waiver of drug label requirements in the following cases:

Information on drug labels for clinical drug research projects that are conducted in many countries and cannot be changed in a timely manner upon submission of the first authorization request (passing the application review and entry into the system)
Information on the label that may refer to other documents (e.g., reference method of dosage administration, record of drug use) should be attached to the reference document with an explanation
Additional labeling after the drug is brought into Thailand in order to comply with the requirements for research drug labels: a label(s) or label image(s) must appear in the same format as the actual label; information on the label that may refer to other documents, such as how to give medicine, reference to medication records, etc., by attaching the reference document with an explanation; the place of labeling is a licensed facility to produce the correct drug, or, if necessary, a waiver may be requested for the labeling operation to be in a controlled location instead. In such cases, labeling procedures must be performed by a pharmacist or other research site health professional, or by an appropriately trained research supervisor. Operational procedures and a record of practices should be prepared, and these documents should be checked by a second person. The labeling should be strictly controlled, and operations must be consistent with modern drug production manufacturing guidelines and procedures.
See Appendix 6 of ClinImprtOrdr, Appendix 6 of THA-18, Appendix 5 of ClinSampleProd, or Appendix 5 of THA-76 for the Application Form for Exemption from Drug Labeling Requirements on a Case-by-Case Basis.

ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd state that recommendations for drugs used as specified in the research protocol, for use in accordance with the indications registered in Thailand (which are procured from the Thai market and do not require further manufacturing or packaging), should include the following information on the original container (but not over the original label):

Sponsor, CRO, or investigator name
Research project code
Statements "for clinical research purposes only" or other words synonymous with the Thai language
Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

As defined in G-ResEthics and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), the sponsor or the designated contract research organization (CRO) must supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the investigational products (IPs), including the comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable. The sponsor or the designated CRO should not supply either party with the IP(s) until approval is obtained from the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) and the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH), another ethics committee (EC) (e.g., the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC)), and/or the local EC. The ECMOPH and the CREC are both ECs recognized by the Thai FDA. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

G-ResEthics and THA-28 specify that the sponsor or the designated CRO must ensure the following:

Timely delivery of the IP(s)
Records maintained for document shipment of the IP(s)
Written procedures including instructions for handling and storage of the IP(s), adequate and safe receipt of the IP(s), dispensing of the IP(s), retrieval of unused IP(s), return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor, and disposal of unused IP(s) by the sponsor
IP product quality and stability over the period of use
IP manufactured according to any applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP)
Proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP(s)
Acceptable IP handling and storage conditions and shelf life
Refer to the G-ResEthics and THA-28 for detailed, sponsor-related IP requirements. As defined in G-ResEthics and THA-28, the sponsor is also accountable for supplying the IP, including the comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable.

Record Requirements

As per G-ResEthics and THA-28, the sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and institution(s) in writing of the need for record retention and should notify the investigator(s) and institution(s) in writing when the trial related records are no longer needed. Additionally, the sponsor must ensure sufficient quantities of the IP(s) used in the trial to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary, and should maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics. All sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained for at least two (2) years after formal discontinuation of the trial or in conformance with applicable regulatory requirements.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
In Thailand, a specimen is generally referred to as biological material. As delineated in G-ResEthics, biological material is defined as original material, progeny, and unmodified derivatives. In the Material Transfer Agreement template provided in G-ResEthics, material covered by the agreement includes all living or dead biological materials and any replicated or derived cells or DNA molecules.

G-ResEthics collectively classifies biomedical research as those studies that include information from a participant’s medical records or databases; laboratory specimens; bodily fluids; human tissues; and studies about the physiology, biochemistry, pathology, biochemistry, and psychology of typical participants.

In addition, G-ResEthics specifically defines human tissue samples as anything being taken out or excreted from a human body or a corpse. These samples may also include other tissues, blood, secretions, and excretions from all organ systems to be used for the diagnosis of a disease or for other purposes.

Please refer to G-ResEthics for more specific definitions for selected terms including progeny and unmodified derivatives.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Import/Export

No information is currently available regarding the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA)’s role in approving the import and export of biological specimens.

Material Transfer Agreement

G-ResEthics states that in the case of the transfer of biological materials, the sponsor must complete the Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) form (Annex 8) to obtain or transfer biological materials for research purposes. An MTA form must also be used to transfer human tissue samples to other institutions.

See also THA-13 for the Material Transfer Agreement and Material Transfer Record forms provided by the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH).

Per THA-34, the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) requires investigators to include a (draft) MTA in the initial protocol submission package in cases where specimens are sent to an outside research institution, according to each institution’s form. This document will be used by the CREC for consideration, but it is not endorsed.

The ECMOPH and the CREC are both ethics committees approved by the Thai FDA to review and approve clinical trial protocols.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
In accordance with G-ResEthics, prior to collecting, storing, or using a research participant’s biological specimen(s), written consent must be obtained from the participant or legal representative.

As per G-ResEthics, the investigator(s) are responsible for clarifying to the participant and the legal representative whether the biological materials collected from the study will be destroyed. If the samples will be used, a clear explanation must be provided as to how the samples will be stored, plans for future use, and whether such use is limited. In addition, the investigator(s) must inform the participants whether any products will be derived from the biological materials collected during the study. (See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent).

G-ResEthics states that written consent should be obtained from the donor or the giver of the tissue samples. The general requirements for consent must be met, including the investigator(s) obtaining institutional ethics committee (EC) review and approval of the research protocol and for complying with ethical guidelines in compliance with the applicable laws and regulations when conducting research using tissue samples. The guidelines should provide procedures for tissue sample collection, processing, distribution, disposal, and storage for the duration of the research or for future use. The participant or the legal representative must be given detailed information about how the samples will be used and stored, and about their right to request the samples be destroyed when the research is complete.

In addition, per G-ResEthics, for retrospective studies using stored human tissue samples, the institution and the EC should establish the rules and regulations to decide when the investigator can waive a donor’s informed consent in order to use stored tissue samples for research. Refer to Section 7.5 of G-ResEthics for detailed information.

G-ResEthics states that the investigator or institution must obtain consent for human genetic research. Investigators and institutions must comply with numerous requirements to ensure participant consent, protection, and privacy rights are upheld with regard to the storage of genetic materials. See Sections 7.6 and 7.7 of G-ResEthics for detailed coverage of genetic research consent requirements.

As noted in THA-34, the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) recommends that investigators use the informed consent form (ICF) templates provided by the Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Thailand (FERCIT), including a broad ICF for the storage and use of data and biospecimens for future research (see THA-46 for document links). The CREC is one (1) of the ECs approved by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) to review and approve clinical trial protocols.

Requirements
(Legislation) Drug Act B.E.2510 (A.C. 1967) and its Amendments (DrugAct - Thai) (English-DrugAct - Google Translation) (Effective October 13, 2019)
National Assembly
(Legislation) Hospital Act (B.E. 2541) (HospitalAct - Thai) (English-HospitalAct - Unofficial translation) (March 15, 1998)
National Assembly
(Legislation) Mental Health Act (No. 2) (B.E. 2562) (MentalHlthAct - Thai and English) (2019)
National Assembly
(Legislation) National Health Act (B.E. 2550) (NatHlthAct - Thai) (English-NatHlthAct - Unofficial translation) (March 3, 2007)
National Assembly
(Legislation) Personal Data Protection Act, (B.E. 2562) (2019) and the Relevant Notifications of the Personal Data Protection Committee (PDPA - Thai) (English-PDPA – Google Translation) (June 1, 2022)
Office of the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Public Health
(Legislation) Thailand Civil and Commercial Code (B.E. 2468) (ThaiCode - Thai) (Effective January 1, 1925)
National Assembly
(Regulation) Medical Council Regulations on the Maintenance Medical Profession Ethics (B.E. 2549) (2006) (MCEthics - Thai) (Effective December 1, 2006)
Medical Council of Thailand, Ministry of Public Health
(Regulation) Notification of the Food and Drug Administration Re: Establishment of an Evaluation Channel Based on the Evaluation Results of the Quality Accreditation Agency, Ethics Review Committee (EC-QualAccredReq - Thai) (Effective September 26, 2019)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Regulation) Notification of the Food and Drug Administration Re: Rules, Procedures and Conditions for Accepting Ethics Committee for Research Involving Human Subjects (ECRegProc - Thai) (English-ECRegProc - Google Translation) (Effective November 13, 2018)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Regulation) Notification of the Foundation for Human Research Promotion in Thailand, M.S.T. 011/2565 Amending the Notification of the Fees for Ethical Consideration of Human Research (CRECFees - Thai) (English-CRECFees - Google Translation) (Effective July 6, 2022)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Regulation) Notification of the Medicines Regulation Division Re: Details of the Requirements for Importing or Ordering Drugs into the Kingdom for Clinical Research (N.Y.M.1 Applications) (ClinImprtOrdr - Thai) (English-ClinImprtOrdr - Google Translation) (Effective August 7, 2023)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Regulation) Notification of the Medicines Regulation Division Re: Details of the Requirements for the Production of Modern Drug Samples for Clinical Research (P.Y.8 Application) (ClinSampleProd - Thai) (English-ClinSampleProd - Google Translation) (Effective August 7, 2023)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Regulation) Notification of the Medicines Regulation Division Re: the Methods, Formats, and Supporting Documents for Requesting Approval for Clinical Research Drugs through the Express Channel (ExprssChnnl - Thai) (March 16, 2020)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Regulation) Notification of the Ministry of Public Health Re: Expenses to be Collected from Applicants for the Drug Approval Process (B.E. 2566) (ClinDrugFees - Thai) (December 2, 2023)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Regulation) Notification of the Ministry of Public Health Re: Rules, Procedures and Conditions for Importing or Ordering Drugs into the Kingdom Without Registration of the Formula, No. 14 (B.E. 2532) (DrugImprtRules-1989 - Thai) (August 1, 1989)
Ministry of Public Health
(Regulation) Notification of the Ministry of Public Health Re: Rules, Procedures and Conditions for Importing or Ordering Drugs into the Kingdom Without Requesting Registration of the Formula, No. 2 (B.E. 2552) (DrugImprtRules-2009 - Thai) (Effective July 9, 2009)
Ministry of Public Health
(Regulation) Notification of the Ministry of Public Health Re: Specifying Details on the Criteria and Methods for the Production of Modern Drugs and to Amend the Rules and Procedures for the Production of Traditional Medicine According to the Drug Act (B.E. 2559) (DrugProdReqs - Thai) (English-DrugProdReqs - Google Translation) (Effective May 18, 2016)
Ministry of Public Health
(Regulation) Notification of the Personal Data Protection Committee Re: Criteria and Procedures for Reporting Personal Data Breach Incidents (B.E. 2565) (PDPC-Breach - Thai) (English-PDPC-Breach - Google Translation) (December 15, 2022)
Personal Data Protection Committee
(Regulation) Notification of the Prime Minister's Office Re: the Appointment of the Chairman of the Committee and Qualified Members of the Personal Data Protection Committee (PDPC-Estab - Thai) (English-PDPC-Estab - Google Translation) (January 18, 2022)
Office of the Prime Minister
(Guidance) Guideline on Submission of Application for Drug Import Permit into Thailand for Clinical Trial (G-CT-DIPApp) (September 2009)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Assessing Risk and Reporting Personal Data Breaches (G-PDPBreaches - Thai) (English-G-PDPBreaches - Google Translation) (Version 1.0) (December 15, 2022)
Office of the Personal Data Protection Committee
(Guidance) Guidelines for Conditional Authorization of Advanced Medical Products (G-ATMPAuth - Thai) (October 24, 2024)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Notifying the Purpose and Details of Collecting Personal Data from Personal Data Subjects Under the Personal Data Protection Act (B.E. 2562) (G-PDPNotif - Thai) (English-G-PDPNotif - Google Translation) (September 7, 2022)
Personal Data Protection Committee
(Guidance) Guidelines for Obtaining Consent from Personal Data Subjects Under the Personal Data Protection Act (B.E. 2562) (G-PDPConsent - Thai) (English-G-PDPConsent - Google Translation) (September 7, 2022)
Personal Data Protection Committee
(Guidance) Guidelines for Reporting Adverse Events from the Seminar “Achieving Guidance in Clinical Trial Safety Information Among Stakeholder” (G-AEReptReqs - Thai and English) (June 2011)
Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Thailand
(Guidance) The Ethical Guidelines for Research on Human Subject in Thailand, 2007 (G-ResEthics - Thai) (English-G-ResEthics - Official translation) (December 2007)
Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Thailand
Additional Resources
(Article) Amendments to Thailand’s Drug Act (THA-6) (May 21, 2019)
Homhuan, Atthachai; Tilleke & Gibbons
(Article) Clinical Trial Regulatory & Approval Process in Thailand (Part 1) (THA-1) (September 12, 2016)
Credevo
(Article) How to Request a License Per Invoice (THA-88 -Thai) (August 4, 2023)
FDA Story Company Limited
(Article) License Per Invoice (THA-48 - Thai) (English-THA-48 - Google Translation) (May-August 2014)
Chantarach, Rajitpan; Food and Drug Journal
(Article) Overview of Thai PDPC's Notification and Guidelines On Data Breaches (THA-15) (March 1, 2023)
Mirandah, Denise; Global Advertising Lawyers Alliance
(Article) PDPA Update - Thailand’s New Legislation on Personal Data Breach Notification (THA-17) (December 22, 2022)
Paiboon, Nonnabhat; Herbert Smith Freehills
(Article) Thailand: Medical Research, Pharmacovigilance, Data Management, And Data Privacy (THA-10) (May 27, 2022)
Formichella, John and Jamallsawat, Naytiwut; Formichella & Sritawat
(Article) Thailand: Newest PDPA Guidelines Issued by PDPC (THA-16) (September 15, 2022)
Anuktanakul, Jutharat; Charungkit-Anant, Koonlacha; Chueabunchai, Suphakorn; Laohapairoj, Pranat; Sombatsatapornkul, Theerapat; Chandler MHM Limited
(Article) Thailand’s Clinical Trial Regulatory Scenario: Update 1 (THA-3) (February 14, 2017)
Credevo
(Article) Thailand’s Latest Approved IRB List: Update 2 (THA-4) (March 27, 2019)
Credevo
(Article) The Ministry of Public Health Joins the Central Agency to Consider Human Research Ethics to Support the Consideration of Multi-institutional Research Projects (THA-63 - Thai) (February 6, 2022)
Hfocus.org news agency
(Article) The Ultimate Guide to the Thailand PDPA (THA-61) (August 2, 2022)
OneTrust DataGuidance
(Document) Account Details for the Foundation for the Promotion of Human Research in Thailand (THA-42 – Thai and English) (English-THA-42 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Document) Announcement of Document Processing Fees for “Request for Amendment of Certification Document” (THA-108 - Thai) (Effective December 1, 2023)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Document) Declaration of Rights and Code of Conduct for Patients (THA-11 - Thai) (English-THA-11 - Unofficial translation) (August 12, 2015)
Medical Council, Nursing Council, Pharmacy Council, Dental Council, Physical Therapy Council, Medical Technology Council, and Medical Practice Committee
(Document) Drug Import Exemption Application System (THA-87 - Thai) (July 2022)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Document) Guideline for Industry: User Manual of Thai FDA Skynet - Volume 2 Procedure for Medicinal Product's System: Appendix 12 - System for Importing or Ordering Drugs for Research Purposes into the Kingdom Without Registration of the Formula (THA-57 - Thai) (English-THA-57 - Google Translation) (Revision No. A12-20220705) (Date Unavailable)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Document) Guidelines and Procedures for Conducting Research on Human Subjects (THA-13 - Thai and English) (Date Unavailable)
Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health
(Document) Guidelines for Applying for Services and Granting Privileges to Health Product Consulting System (E-Consult) Service Recipients (THA-65 - Thai) (English-THA-65 - Google Translation) (2nd Revision) (December 22, 2022)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Document) Introducing the FDA Agency and General Registration Principles (THA-91 - Thai) (English-THA-91 – Google Translation) (March 9, 2017)
Assawakitwiri, Winit; Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Document) Local Ethics Committee Information (THA-94 - Thai) (Update 4) (Date Unavailable)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Document) Notification of New Guidelines for Conducting Multi-Institutional Research Projects (THA-97 - Thai) (English-THA-97 – Google Translate) (March 6, 2025)
Foundation for Human Research Promotion in Thailand, National Research Council of Thailand
(Document) Preparing for Use of the FDA E-Submissions System (THA-75 - Thai) (English-THA-75 - Google Translation) (August 22, 2023)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Document) Researcher’s Code of Ethics (THA-14 - Thai) (1998)
National Research Council of Thailand
(International Guidance) Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (THA-26) (Step 4 Version) (October 27, 1994)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (THA-45) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) International Ethical Guidelines for Health-related Research Involving Humans (THA-7) (2016)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(International Guidance) Operational Guidelines for Ethics Committees that Review Biomedical Research (THA-64) (2000)
World Health Organization
(International Guidance) Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (THA-27) (Step 4 Version) (November 1995)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) About Us (THA-44 - English and Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) Acceptance of the Committee for Consideration of Ethics in Human Research - Form (THA-107 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Amendment Report Type (Site-Specific) (THA-99 - Thai) (May 16, 2024)
Foundation for Human Research Promotion in Thailand, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) CREC - Calendar (THA-101 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) CREC - Flow Chart of Project Review Process (THA-98 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) CREC - Project Submission Process with CREC (THA-100 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) CREC - Form for Submitting Research Project Documents (Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) Version 5.1, Dated July 24, 2024) (THA-93 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) CREC - Project Submission Channels (THA-95 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) CREC - Research Project Submission Guide (THA-47 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) Digital ID (THA-89 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Electronic Government Agency
(Webpage) E-Consult System Services (THA-77 - Thai) (February 10, 2025)
Division of Innovative Health Products and Services, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) - E-Submission Login (THA-40 - Thai) (English-THA-40 - Google Translation) (Current as of June 17, 2022)
Ministry of Public Health
(Webpage) Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) - Frequently Asked Questions (THA-41 - Thai) (English-THA-41 - Google Translation) (Current as of June 17, 2022)
Ministry of Public Health
(Webpage) Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) - Roles and Responsibilities (THA-39 - Thai) (English-THA-39 - Google Translation) (Current as of June 17, 2022)
Ministry of Public Health
(Webpage) Forms for Pharmaceutical Products (THA-85 - Thai) (March 31, 2025)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Frequently Asked Questions - Research Ethics (THA-92 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
National Science and Technology Development Agency
(Webpage) Health Product Vigilance Center (HPVC) (THA-30 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Health Product Vigilance Center, Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Importing Drugs for Other Purposes (THA-79 - Thai) (February 21, 2025)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Informed Consent Form Templates and Checklists (THA-46 - Thai and English) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Thailand
(Webpage) Introducing Online Consultation System (E-Consult) (THA-51 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) List of Human Research Ethics Committees Accepted by the FDA (THA-90 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Medicines Regulation Division - About Us (THA-49 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Medicines Regulation Division - Contact Us (THA-72 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Medicines Regulation Division - List of Personnel (THA-52 - Thai) (Last Updated May 1, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) One Stop Service & Consultation Center (OSSC) (THA-35) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Division of Innovative Health Products and Services, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Organizational Structure and Functions (THA-33 - Thai) (English-THA-33) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Payment of Project Review Fees (THA-25 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) Power of Attorney (THA-104 - Thai) (April 28, 2025)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Procedure for Using License Per Invoice through the Central Request System (NSW) (THA-86 - Thai) (April 25, 2025)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Procedures for Drug Products – Process, Duration, and Costs (THA-78 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Division of Innovative Health Products and Services, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Receiving Services at OSSC (THA-66 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Division of Innovative Health Products and Services, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Standard Operating Procedures for the Conduct of the Central Research Ethics Committee and Its Staff (THA-37 - Thai) (Version 5.1) (July 24, 2024)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) Thai Clinical Trials Registry (TCTR) (THA-31) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Medical Research Network (MedResNet), Medical Research Foundation
(Webpage) Thai FDA Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Types of Projects Eligible for CREC Consideration and the Scope of Cooperation of Partner Institutions (THA-24 -Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
Forms
(Form) Annual Report of Operations/Amendments for the Ethics Committee on Clinical Research Drug Studies in Humans - Jor Thor Form 3 (THA-21 - Thai) (English-THA-21 - Google Translation) (September 10, 2018)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Application Form for Medicine Importation (THA-84 - English and Thai) (February 28, 2025)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) CIOMS Form I (THA-20) (Date Unavailable)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(Form) CREC - Financial Information/Details Statement (THA-50 - Thai) (English-THA-50 - Google Translation) (Version 2.0) (January 10, 2024)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Form) Declaration of Conflict of Interest (AP 06-S04) (THA-103 – Thai and English) (English-THA-103 – Google Translate) (Version 5.1) (July 24, 2024)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Form) Documents Attached to the Notification of the Medicines Regulation Division - Details of the Requirements for Importing or Ordering Drugs into the Kingdom for Clinical Research (THA-18 - Thai) (English-THA-18 - Google Translation) (August 7, 2023)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Documents Attached to the Notification of the Medicines Regulation Division - Details of the Requirements for the Production of Modern Drug Samples for Clinical Research (THA-76 - Thai) (English-THA-76 - Google Translation) (August 7, 2023)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Health Product Adverse Event Report Form (HPVC Form-1) (THA-22 - Thai) (English-THA-22 - Official Translation) (August 1, 2024)
Health Product Vigilance Center (HPVC), Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) List of Documents (AP 08-S04) (THA-96 - Thai) (English-THA-96 – Google Translate) (Version 5.1) (February 5, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Form) List of Items Attached to N.D.W. (THA-106 - Thai) (Date Unavailable)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Patient Information Sheet Checklist (AP 09-S04) (THA-109 - Thai) (English-THA-109 – Google Translation) (Version 5.1) (July 24, 2024)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Form) Power of Attorney Form for Permission to Use the Health Product Consultation System (E-Consult) (THA-81 - Thai) (English-THA-81 - Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Division of Innovative Health Products and Services, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Protocol Package Checklist Form (AO 01-S04) (THA-34 - Thai) (English-THA-34 - Google Translation) (Version 5.1) (Updated October 15, 2024)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Form) Request for Acceptance or to Renew Acceptance for Authorization as a Research Ethics Committee to Review Clinical Research Drug Studies in Humans - Jor Thor Form EC-1 (THA-23 - Thai) (English-THA-23 - Google Translation) (September 10, 2018)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Request for Officers at the Import Checkpoint to Inspect Drugs Brought or Ordered into the Kingdom for Research, Analysis, Exhibition, or Charitable Donation (Form N.D.W.) (THA-105 - Thai) (English-THA-105 – Google Translate) (Date Unavailable)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Request Form for Permission to Use the Health Product Consultation System (E-Consult) (THA-80 - Thai) (English-THA-80 - Google Translation) (Last Updated March 20, 2023)
Division of Innovative Health Products and Services, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Submission Form for Biomedical Research (AP 04-S04) (THA-102 - Thai) (English-THA-102 – Google Translation) (Version 5.1) (July 24, 2024)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Thailand
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
This message was reviewed on December 29, 2025
ECMOPH Website

The Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) website (http://www.ecmoph.moph.go.th/site/index) is not accessible to users residing outside of Thailand. 

Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Thai Food and Drug Administration

As per the DrugAct, ClinSampleProd, and ClinImprtOrdr, the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) is the regulatory authority responsible for controlling the import of drugs for research purposes, and it also uses this authority to indirectly regulate drug clinical trials in humans. Per ClinSampleProd and DrugProdReqs, the Thai FDA is also responsible for approving requests for permission to produce drug samples for the registration of drug formulas for human research studies. As set forth in the DrugAct and THA-33, the Thai FDA is a regulatory body under the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) and is granted control by the MOPH to protect consumer health. The agency is also authorized to ensure the quality, safety, and efficacy of health products including foods, drugs, cosmetics, and medical devices in Thailand.

In addition, per the DrugAct’s 2019 amendments and according to THA-6, the MOPH has the authority to establish and/or amend drug research-related procedures, regulations, and conditions via Government Gazette announcements. The Thai FDA’s Secretary-General is also permitted to control drug research study activities by issuing temporary suspensions, requesting specific improvements, or completely discontinuing a study that fails to comply with the Minister’s published guidelines.

As indicated in the DrugAct, the Thai FDA’s Medicines Regulation Division is a member of the Drug Board (also referred to as the Drug Committee in the English translation of the DrugAct). Per the DrugAct, the board must consist of MOPH departmental directors-general and representatives from related organizations, as well as five (5) to nine (9) drug experts. Every two (2) years, the Minister of Public Health appoints the Committee, which is chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the MOPH. The DrugAct also indicates that the board should appoint a subcommittee to study the drug review and approval process. The subcommittee should include at least the following: an office representative and Office of Consumer Protection Board representatives including association, foundation, and drug industry representatives whose purpose is to produce, sell, import, or order drugs for use in Thailand. See THA-33 for the Thai FDA’s organizational structure.

THA-49 further explains that the Medicines Regulation Division is in charge of reviewing licenses to import or order drugs used for clinical research in Thailand that are exempt from drug registration, issuing licenses to produce drug samples for drug formula registration, and issuing licenses to import or order drug samples for research purposes in Thailand. See THA-49 for additional information on the Medicines Regulation Division’s responsibilities. (See also THA-18 and THA-76 for appendices included in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr.)

As described in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr, the Thai FDA’s Medicines Regulation Division is responsible for application review and recommendation for approval. Per ClinSampleProd, the Secretary-General of the Thai FDA then makes the final decision to approve the application.

Division of Innovative Health Products and Services

As explained in THA-91, the Thai FDA’s Division of Innovative Health Products and Services is a service center that provides advice regarding health product authorization and research and development, product classification, and also accepts requests regarding health products. Its responsibilities include reviewing requests for one-stop service for locally researched and produced health products and innovative products. The Division also develops innovative electronic health product authorization processes; conducts research to develop work systems and establish standards for innovative products, such as for production processes, imports, sales, clinical research, and advertising; and develops policies, regulations, criteria, and practices regarding the licensing of health products. Per THA-66, the Division also houses the agency’s One Stop Service & Consultation Center (OSSC) (THA-35) within the Comprehensive Health Products Service Center. OSSC services include providing preliminary consultations, processing product application submissions (e.g., applications submitted to obtain drug import licenses for clinical research purposes), and handling payment services (e.g., permissions and licensing) for various health products including drugs. See the Submission Process section for more details on the import application submission process.

Contact Information

Per THA-72, the Thai FDA’s contact information is as follows:

Medicines Regulation Division
Food and Drug Administration
Ministry of Public Health
88/24 Tiwanon Road
Talat Khwan Subdistrict
Mueang District, Nonthaburi Province 11000

Email: drug@fda.moph.go.th
Email: saraban@fda.moph.go.th (General FDA Correspondence)
Phone: 0 2590 7000
Phone: 0 2590 1556 (FDA Call Center)
Fax: 0 2590 7116

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the DrugAct and ClinImprtOrdr, the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) is responsible for overseeing the import or ordering of drugs for clinical research purposes, and also uses this authority to indirectly regulate drug clinical trials in humans. Per ClinSampleProd and DrugProdReqs, the Thai FDA is also responsible for approving requests for permission to produce drug samples for the registration of drug formulas for human research studies. As per G-ResEthics, the scope of the Thai FDA’s assessment includes Phases I through IV clinical trials for new drugs (also referred to as “modern drugs”), traditional drugs (drugs intended for use in the practice of traditional medicine or to cure animal disease), unregistered drugs, registered drugs being studied in new doses or for indications not previously approved, and locally produced drugs that require efficacy testing.

As indicated in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and ECRegProc, the Thai FDA’s approvals of a drug import license and of a request for permission to produce sample drugs for human research studies are dependent upon obtaining proof of ethics committee (EC) approval to conduct the clinical trial by a Thai FDA approved EC. ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr further specify that for both types of approval requests, the application is either submitted to the Thai FDA after the research project and all of the research site(s) have been approved by an EC, or in parallel, pending review by the relevant EC.

Clinical Trial Review Process

As set forth in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and G-CT-DIPApp, the Thai FDA coordinates the review of applications submitted to obtain drug import licenses for clinical research purposes (N.Y.M.1) and applications submitted to request permission to produce drug samples for human research studies (P.Y.8). Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, an applicant should submit the application along with supporting documents to the Medicines Regulation Division.

Per G-CT-DIPApp, upon receipt of a drug import license application (N.Y.M.1) package, the Thai FDA’s One Stop Service & Consultation Center (OSSC) (THA-35) sends the application package to an officer in the Thai FDA’s International Affairs and Investigational Drug Section. After administrative processing and troubleshooting, the officer will send the application package to the assigned reviewer to proceed. The reviewer then receives the application package and performs a technical assessment. If the reviewer determines the package is technically correct, then it will be forwarded to the Thai FDA for approval. ClinImprtOrdr specifies that the Secretary-General is responsible for authorizing all drugs to be imported into the country. (See Submission Process and Timeline of Review sections for details on the administrative and technical processing and review timelines.)

According to the DrugAct, the Thai FDA’s approval of a drug import license application for clinical research purposes also serves as an import license that allows the sponsor to import investigational drugs into Thailand. The license will remain valid until December 31st of the year of issue. The license holder who would like to renew the license must file an application for renewal prior to the license expiration date. (See the Manufacturing & Import section for detailed license renewal instructions.)

Per G-CT-DIPApp, after the import license is granted, the applicant must inform or request permission from the Thai FDA prior to initiating the following:

Changes to clinical trial drug supplies
Changes to an approved protocol (protocol amendment) or changes related to or affecting participant safety
In cases where the sponsor is required to immediately make one (1) or more amendments because the clinical trial or the use of investigational products in the trial endangers the health of a clinical trial participant or other person, the applicant may immediately make the amendment without prior review by the Thai FDA. A corresponding notification clearly identifying the change and the rationale for immediate implementation of the change must be filed within 15 working days after the amendment implementation date. A corresponding notification letter referring to the related approved import license along with supplemental documents to be provided in the Form for Requesting Corrections/Additional Clarifications are also required (see ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 12) and THA-18 (Appendix 12)).

Per G-CT-DIPApp, after the import license is granted, the applicant must also notify the Thai FDA of changes to the protocol that do not affect the safety of the trial participants.

No information is currently available on the review process for P.Y.8 application submissions.

Per the ExprssChnnl, a request for expedited review of N.Y.M.1 and P.Y.8 applications through an express channel may be submitted to the Thai FDA’s OSSC (THA-35) in the case of a public health emergency. The processing time is 10 days from the date of receipt of the request for entry into the system. A letter explaining the request for expedited review must be attached to the standard application and accompanying documents, as applicable. Eligible applicants may request waivers of certain requirements based on appropriate and necessary reasons, clearly delineated in the form provided in the ExprssChnnl. The application may be submitted after all research sites have been approved by the EC, or in parallel while awaiting the results of review by at least one (1) EC.

Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) may also establish an academic committee or subcommittee for certain drugs requiring special supervision (e.g., the Academic Subcommittee on AIDS Vaccine Trials).

As delineated in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, the Thai FDA has procedures to monitor the research project before, during, and after the trial ends or is terminated. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd specify that the authorized Thai FDA officer will contact the licensee to schedule an inspection appointment and provide a letter notifying the licensee at least seven (7) days in advance, except in those cases where the Thai FDA has a special request to carry out an inspection immediately and does not notify the licensee in advance. Refer to ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd for detailed licensee information on preparing for the inspection. See also THA-18 (Appendix 11) and THA-76 (Appendix 7) for the self-examination form containing the Thai officer’s inspection summary).

Additionally, see the G-ATMPAuth for Thai FDA guidelines on conditional authorization of advanced medical therapy products (ATMPs).

Refer to the Submission Process section for submission requirements.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Thai Food and Drug Administration

In accordance with ClinDrugFees, the applicant is required to pay a fee to the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) to submit an application to request permission to import or order drugs for research purposes in Thailand. The ClinDrugFees states that the Thai FDA requires an administrative processing fee of 1,000 Baht to review and verify the correctness of certain application requests related to authorization, including:

Applications to request permission to import or order drugs into the Kingdom for research purposes without registering a drug formula (N.Y.M.1 form) (See ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 2) and THA-18 (Appendix 2) for N.Y.M.1 form)
Applications for drug samples produced for research studies (P.Y.8 form) (See ClinSampleProd (Appendix 1) and THA-76 (Appendix 1) for P.Y.8 form)
In addition, per ClinDrugFees and THA-78, the Thai FDA charges the following fees for the technical evaluation of documents of any application request related to authorization (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Application for permission to import or order drugs for research purposes in the country (N.Y.M.1) or to request permission to register and produce sample drugs for human research studies (P.Y.8): 4,000 Baht
Application to expand the scope of a license to produce drug samples and register new drugs for human research studies (for drugs in bioequivalence studies): 1,000 Baht
New research drug application to expand the scope of a license to produce drug samples and register a new drug for human research studies (for drugs other than those in bioequivalence studies): 4,000 Baht
Application to amend and request specific changes related to the application requests listed in the preceding bullets: 500 Baht
Requesting a certificate of pharmaceutical product (Certificate of Pharmaceutical Product/Certificate of Free Sale): 500 Baht
Request for review of accuracy and translation of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) assessment report from Thai version to English version: 1,500 Baht
In addition, per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, in the case of the applicant designating a power of attorney to submit a paper application in person or via PDF file, the Stamp Duty fee is 30 Baht per attorney designation.

Payment Instructions

According to the Thai FDA’s One Stop Service & Consultation Center (OSSC) (THA-35), the OSSC’s finance section provides payment services in cases where expenses need to be paid for various submissions, and accepts multiple payment methods including cash, credit cards, and mobile banking applications. However, per THA-79, in order to submit an electronic payment using the Thai FDA’s Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54), the applicant must first submit documentation to request access to the system as required by the OSSC (see THA-104 for information on submitting power of attorney to access the system as an agent). Once the OSSC approves e-submission system access, the applicant can submit a payment electronically to request a drug importation waiver via THA-54. See Submission Process section for detailed submission instructions and documentation requirements to access THA-54. Refer to THA-57 for the Skynet e-submission user manual and THA-87 for a guide to request a drug importation waiver via THA-54.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Note: The Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) website (http://www.ecmoph.moph.go.th/site/index) is not accessible to users residing outside of Thailand.

Overview

As per ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and ECRegProc, clinical trials require ethics committee (EC) approval for each trial site from an EC recognized by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA). ECRegProc indicates that an EC may function as a committee under a government agency (e.g., the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH)); as a committee affiliated with a private hospital/institution licensed to comply with the HospitalAct; or, as a committee operating as a part of a non-profit partnership between a government agency and a private organization(s) (e.g., the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC)). ECRegProc states that the Thai FDA posts a list of the approved/renewed ECs on its website (see THA-90), and as noted in THA-3, this usually occurs every two (2) years. According to THA-4, the ECMOPH and the CREC are both government ECs whose approvals are still active. As discussed in THA-63, the ECMOPH and the CREC are also collaborating on a multi-institutional clinical research project to reduce redundancy during the review process and to develop joint human research ethics guidelines. (See THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr.)

Per THA-1, the ECMOPH and the CREC represent the two (2) central ECs recognized by the Thai FDA to review and approve clinical research protocols involving humans. THA-1 further explains that both the ECMOPH and the CREC are categorized as central ECs because they can accept all clinical research studies for review, regardless of the trial sites involved.

See THA-94 for a CREC-maintained list of local/institutional ECs and their contact and submission information.

Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health

Per THA-39, the ECMOPH is responsible for controlling, supervising, and monitoring research in accordance with international ethical principles; developing research policies; suspending unethical research programs; creating a national database of clinical research; establishing a regional/international committee network system; developing personnel capacity to support clinical research in Thailand; and other related or assigned academic projects. See THA-13 for additional details about the ECMOPH, and THA-13 and THA-39 for requirements specifically related to studies approved by the ECMOPH.

Central Research Ethics Committee

Per THA-1, the CREC was formed in 2014 through the cooperative efforts of 26 public and private institutions in Thailand, including the Thai FDA. THA-44 explains that the goal of the CREC, which operates under the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT) and the Foundation for Human Research Promotion in Thailand, is to develop an effective collaborative system among institutional ECs in Thailand, and to improve the efficiency of the ethics review process. See THA-44 for additional information on the CREC, and the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for detailed CREC submission requirements.

Ethics Committee Composition

As per G-ResEthics, institutional ECs should consist of at least five (5) members, both male and female, with the following qualifications:

At least one (1) member with knowledge and experience in research fields regularly reviewed (e.g., medicine, public health, social science, etc.)
At least one (1) member who is a lawyer or has legal expertise
At least one (1) member who is unaffiliated with the institution, and, if possible, that member should be selected from the community where the institution is based
At least two (2) members who have patient care, counseling, and treatment knowledge and experience
At least one-third of the total EC should be knowledgeable or trained in human research ethics
ECRegProc, by comparison, also requires institutional ECs to have at least five (5) members who are experts on science, medicine, and ethics. In addition, the committee must include members representing the following qualifications:

At least three (3) members who are medical professionals
At least one (1) member must be an expert in a non-scientific category
At least one (1) member from outside of the institution where the trial is taking place
The International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) similarly indicates that ECs should be composed of medical personnel, scientists, and non-scientists, and also notes that while these committees may have differences in legal status, composition, and function, the duties of an EC should be consistent with THA-28. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

Because each EC has its own requirements, it is recommended that the individual ECs be contacted to confirm their specific requirements.

No information is available on ECMOPH and CREC composition requirements.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

As delineated in G-ResEthics and ECRegProc, ECs must conduct clinical protocol reviews according to THA-28 using written standard operating procedures (SOPs) that are periodically updated, and develop a process for conducting reviews. The SOPs should include information on EC composition, meeting schedules, timeframes for protocol reviews, quorum requirements, decision-making procedures, channels of communicating the decision(s), complaint processes, reviewing fees (if any), protection of protocol confidentiality, and prevention of possible conflicts of interests. The G-ResEthics also states that each EC must establish the composition, member terms of service, and criteria for selecting the committee members, as appropriate. The members must also be appointed officially as evidenced by a written document.

Additionally, per ECRegProc, ECs must meet the following requirements:

Have the legal qualifications or comply with the government regulations related to providing research or research-related services
Have a clearly defined structure with proof of appropriately appointed members, including the secretary and secretariat
Have voting rights and the right to issue independent research opinions without investigator/sponsor involvement, and with no direct or indirect interest or conflict of interest with the investigator or clinical research study
Have members who are trained in conducting research and clinical trials in human participants, and who participate in ethics training or other related training at least once every two (2) years while serving on the committee
Have experience in reviewing human research involving experimental drugs for at least 10 studies
For detailed EC requirements and information on other administrative processes, see G-ResEthics and ECRegProc.

Also, refer to THA-93 for a list of CREC forms for submitting research project documents and THA-37 for a complete list of CREC SOPs. See THA-101 for the CREC meeting schedule.

No information is available on the ECMOPH’s terms of reference, review procedures, and meeting schedule.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

As delineated in G-ResEthics, ECRegProc, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), the primary scope of information assessed by Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) recognized ethics committees (ECs) relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial. According to THA-10, clinical research and trials (i.e., research studies and experiments on humans) are subject to the medical ethics standards delineated in the Regulations of the Medical Council on Maintaining the Ethics of the Medical Profession (B.E. 2549) (MCEthics) and the Declaration of Rights and Code of Conduct for Patients (THA-11).

MCEthics explains that ECs are established to review the ethical aspects of research studies and human trials to protect the rights, safety, and well-being of participants in research studies and human trials. THA-11 indicates that every patient has the fundamental right to receive professional medical and health care from health professionals without discrimination as provided for in the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand (B.E. 2560). According to THA-14, researchers should treat all research participants, whether animate or inanimate, with appropriate respect and consideration and should take full responsibility for the impact and consequences of their research. Researchers should also have respect for the dignity and rights of their human participants. Per G-ResEthics, ECRegProc, and THA-28, ECs must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses, and Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations).

In addition, per G-ResEthics, ECRegProc, and THA-28, ECs are also responsible for ensuring an independent, timely, and competent review of all ethical aspects of the clinical trial protocol. ECs must act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved, evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants; confirming the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, and methods; and verifying the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards. G-ResEthics further states that ECs should review the ethical aspects of the protocol in compliance with current international ethical guidelines while taking into account local or national laws, religions, traditions, and cultures. Per G-ResEthics, the appointed EC is also responsible for ensuring that research conducted within the institution adheres to ethical principles including those established in the Declaration of Helsinki (THA-45), the Council for International Organizations of Medical Science (CIOMS)’ International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects (THA-7), and the World Health Organization (WHO)’s Operational Guidelines for Ethics Committees that Review Biomedical Research (THA-64). See G-ResEthics, ECRegProc, and THA-28 for detailed ethical review guidelines. MCEthics further states that the medical practitioner who conducts or participates in the research study on humans must only undertake such study or experiment after it is approved by the EC responsible for the study. The medical practitioner must also conform to G-ResEthics and THA-14 when conducting the research study.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

Pursuant to ClinImprtOrdr and ECRegProc, Thai FDA-recognized ECs are responsible for reviewing and approving protocols for clinical research related to drugs to be imported into Thailand. Per ClinSampleProd and DrugProdReqs, the Thai FDA is also responsible for approving requests for permission to produce drug samples for the registration of drug formulas for human research studies. As stated in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and ECRegProc, the Thai FDA’s approvals of a drug import license and of a request for permission to produce sample drugs for human research studies are dependent upon obtaining approval by a Thai FDA approved EC. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd further specify that for both types of approval requests, the application is either submitted to the Thai FDA after the research project and all the research sites have been approved by an EC, or in parallel, pending review by at least one (1) EC involved in the study.

G-ResEthics further states that research conducted in public hospitals or public health care facilities involves expenditures such as laboratory tests and lump sum fees determined by the institution. The disclosure of these payments and other budget items enables the EC to evaluate any conflict of interest and helps the investigator to decide whether to conduct the trial.

In the instance of a multicenter clinical trial, G-ResEthics indicates that protocols submitted to each institution’s EC should contain the same substance and details, and should specify the quality control techniques to ensure that research practices are the same in each institution. Although each institutional EC may independently approve or disapprove an application, G-ResEthics advises the committees from each participating institution to consult with one another to reach a clearly agreed upon decision.

There is no stated expiration date for an EC approval in G-ResEthics, in the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) guidelines (THA-13), or on the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) website. Per ECRegProc, ECs must provide continuous supervision and monitoring, and conduct inspections to ensure that clinical trial operations are carried out in compliance with all approved research projects and research sites without any deviations or changes from those approved by the committee, unless otherwise specified according to THA-28. ECs must also supervise and monitor research projects to ensure that participants’ rights, safety, and well-being are protected (e.g., in the case of an adverse event, etc.).

Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health

According to THA-13, an application submitted to the ECMOPH is initially reviewed by at least two (2) advisors, followed by a final review by the ECMOPH at its regular meeting. At this meeting, the advisors present a summary of the proposal to the committee along with their recommendations. The committee discusses the proposal and sends a list of comments to the principal investigator (PI) for clarification. Once the PI provides the requested information, the committee makes a final decision, and this is reported to the ECMOPH Chairman and the Permanent Secretary for Public Health respectively. A letter of notification signed by the Permanent Secretary for Public Health is then forwarded to the PI and the responsible organization. As earlier stated, this review and approval process is specific to the ECMOPH. However, it can be used to obtain a better understanding of the EC process within Thailand.

Central Research Ethics Committee

As indicated in THA-24, a research project is eligible to apply for CREC review when it meets one (1) of the following criteria:

It is a pharmaceutical-sponsored multi-center clinical trial
It is an investigator-initiated, multi-site study granted by a research funding organization (e.g., the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT), the Thai Health Promotion Foundation (ThaiHealth), the Health Systems Research Institute (HSRI), etc.)
It is a single center, multi-site study of researchers at partner institutions with co-researchers from each site
It is assigned by the Executive Board for consideration
According to THA-100, the PI must submit the research protocol to the CREC three (3) weeks prior to the CREC meeting. As delineated in THA-98 and THA-100, submissions to the CREC are received by the CREC Sorting Secretary, which reviews the research protocol for completeness within five (5) working days. The research protocol may undergo an expedited review (completed within 10 days) or a full board review (completed according to each panel’s schedule). Per THA-100, exemption decisions are also made within 10 working days.

THA-98 and THA-100 indicate that for both types of reviews, the PI or research coordinator will be informed of the CREC decision within five (5) working days. THA-98 notes that CREC review of amendments follows the same processes, except that an expedited review will be completed within five (5) days. Additionally, the PI, research coordinator, or site investigator must submit documents to the local EC in accordance with institutional requirements (within 30 days).

THA-100 further states that if applicable, the PI must submit a revised protocol to the CREC according to the committee’s suggestions within three (3) working days. The CREC will review the revised protocol within 10 working days.

Refer to THA-98 and THA-24 for additional CREC requirements. Additionally, see THA-97 and THA-99 for guidance related to CREC collaboration with local ECs in multi-institutional research projects.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
The Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) and the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) are both ethics committees (ECs) recognized by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) to review and approve clinical trial protocols.

Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health

No information is currently available on ECMOPH fees.

Central Research Ethics Committee

As set forth in CRECFees, the CREC requires investigators to pay a nonrefundable fee to submit a clinical trial research protocol for ethical review and approval.

CRECFees and THA-50 specify the following fees for the ethical review of research projects funded by private capital (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

New research project: 50,000 Baht
Request for certification renewal of old research project: 20,000 Baht
Amendments to the research project (research outline amendments/adding a research location): 10,000 Baht
Report requesting amendments to the research outline: Amendment certified by the local EC of the joint research institute in the CREC-certified research project, followed by a report submitted for CREC consideration (site-specific amendment): No fees charged
Reporting adverse events, reporting non-compliance, notifying the CREC of a research project closure, and various other reports: No fees charged
Edit the Certificate of Approval (CoA) document: 1,000 Baht (see THA-108 for additional information on CoA amendment fees)
Edit certification/acknowledgement: 500 Baht
Edit document with certified seal: 500 Baht
For research projects funded by government agencies, royal colleges, medical professional associations, or personal capital, CRECFees and THA-50 delineates the following fees:

New research project: 25,000 Baht
Request for certification renewal of old research project: 10,000 Baht
Amendments to the research project (research outline amendments/adding a research location): 5,000 Baht
Report requesting amendments to the research outline: Amendment certified by the local EC of the joint research institute in the CREC-certified research project, followed by a report submitted for CREC consideration (site-specific amendment): No fees charged
Reporting adverse events, reporting non-compliance, notifying the CREC of a research project closure, and various other reports: No fees charged
Edit the CoA document: 500 Baht (see THA-108 for additional information on CoA amendment fees)
Edit the certification/acknowledgement: 250 Baht
Edit document with certified seal: 250 Baht
Payment Instructions

THA-42 explains that investigators should submit ethics application fee payments to the following bank:

Bank Name: Krungthai Bank
Branch: Phahonyothin 39
Account Type: Savings Account
Account Name: Foundation for Human Research Promotion in Thailand
Account number: 981-2-84782-0

Per CRECFees and THA-25, the investigators must submit proof of payment with the application submission. CRECFees indicates that the investigators and research sponsor are responsible for paying the fees and preparing the documentation to submit to the research institute. In the case of an investigator having transferred fees for a project that has been cancelled, the investigator may request a refund. The Foundation will deduct 20% of the transferred fee. The investigator should contact the bank for any service fee applied.

THA-50 and THA-25 indicate that any questions regarding the payment submission process may be directed to the following contact:

Miss Netdao Kanseecha
Financial Officer
Phone: 061-089-9966
Email: natdown@crecthailand.org

Per THA-25, if the CREC has no evidence of payment, the application submission will be considered incomplete. See THA-25 for more details on fee payment processes, and THA-50 for additional information on fee rate based on funding source and fee receipts.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

As indicated in ECRegProc, ClinImprtOrdr, and ClinSampleProd, institutional ethics committees (ECs) and other types of ECs, including the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) and the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC), must be authorized by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) to conduct ethical reviews of drug clinical trial protocols. ClinImprtOrdr and ECRegProc specify that authorized ECs are responsible for reviewing and approving protocols for clinical research involving drugs to be imported into Thailand. (See also THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices relating to EC authorization in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd.)

As per ECRegProc, an acceptance letter issued to the ECs by the Thai FDA is valid for two (2) years and may be obtained by applying to the agency using the Jor Thor Form EC-1 (THA-23). Each EC is also required to submit an annual report (THA-21) to the Thai FDA, and to apply for an acceptance extension no later than 60 days before the expiration date. See THA-107 for additional relevant forms.

ECRegProc states that the Thai FDA posts a list of the approved/renewed ECs on its website (see THA-90) and as noted in THA-3, this usually occurs every two (2) years. These ECs are approved in addition to the centralized ECMOPH and the CREC.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

Pursuant to EC-QualAccredReq, in addition to the ECRegProc approval and renewal of approval documentation requirements, the Thai FDA requires ECs to submit proof of accreditation based on an evaluation by a quality accreditation agency in compliance with international accreditation standards. The following organizations are approved by the Thai FDA to provide quality accreditation reviews:

National Ethics Committee Accreditation System of Thailand (NECAST)
The Strategic Initiative for Developing Capacity in Ethical Review (SIDCER)/The Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Asian and Western Pacific Region (FERCAP)
The Association for the Accreditation of Human Research Protection Programs (AAHRPP)
Other Thai FDA-approved quality accreditation agencies
Per EC-QualAccredReq, EC submissions will be reviewed and completed within one (1) business day.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Note: The Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) website (http://www.ecmoph.moph.go.th/site/index) is not accessible to users residing outside of Thailand.

Overview

In accordance with ClinImprtOrdr and G-CT-DIPApp, the sponsor or the contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for submitting a drug import license application for clinical research purposes to the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA). Per ClinSampleProd and DrugProdReqs, the Thai FDA is also responsible for approving requests for permission to produce drug samples for the registration of drug formulas for human research studies.

As set forth in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and ECRegProc, the Thai FDA’s approvals of a drug import license and of a request for permission to produce drug samples for human research studies are dependent upon obtaining proof of ethics committee (EC) approval from the Thai FDA to conduct the clinical trial. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd further specify that for both types of approval requests, the application is either submitted to the Thai FDA after the research project and all the research sites have been approved by an EC, or in parallel, pending review by at least one (1) EC involved in the study. (Note: Per ClinImprtOrdr, the sponsor is also referred to as the applicant or importer.)

Regulatory Submission

OSSC Pre-Submission Permission

According to THA-77 and THA-75, prior to submitting a drug import license application (N.Y.M.1 form), an applicant must first request permission from the Thai FDA’s One Stop Service & Consultation Center (OSSC) (THA-35) to use the OSSC’s online consultation system (E-Consult) (THA-77). Per THA-65, requesting E-Consult permission is a two-part process that initially requires applicants who are Thai citizens to create a user account and register via Digital ID (THA-89) which enables Thai citizens to access all government agency electronic services using a single user account/password. The user account can then be used to submit applications and supporting documentation to the Thai FDA’s Medicines Regulation Division via the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54).

Per THA-65 and THA-77, once registered in THA-89, Thai applicants (i.e., the general public, entrepreneurs, or researchers) are subsequently required to provide documentation to E-Consult (THA-77) to confirm that they, or representatives authorized to act on their behalf, are authorized to use the FDA’s Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54). Although non-citizens cannot register directly with THA-89, they can request permission to authorize a juristic person who receives power of attorney (i.e., agency representatives, registration agents, or researchers who submit applications on behalf of an agency). Documentation should be submitted to E-Consult (THA-77) either in person or via email (econsultcenter@fda.moph.go.th) specifying in the subject line: “Request for authorization to use the information system.”

Per THA-77, for Thai applicants, this documentation includes:

Request Form for Permission to Use the Health Product Consultation System (E-Consult) (THA-80)
Copy of identity card
Per THA-77, for juristic applicants with power of attorney, this documentation includes:

Request Form for Permission to Use the Health Product Consultation System (E-Consult) (THA-80)
Copy of juristic person certificate
Power of attorney form (THA-81)
Copy of identity card of grantor (the national identity card issued to Thai citizens)
Copy of identity card of attorney-in-fact (refers to a passport)
See also THA-51 and THA-66 for additional information on services provided by the OSSC’s E-Consult Service.

Import and Export Division Pre-Submission Permission

Per THA-79, the Thai FDA’s Import and Export Inspection Division also requires applicants to request permission to access the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54) prior to being permitted to submit a drug import waiver application for clinical trial purposes. Also, per THA-87, Thai applicants may register and submit authorization documentation via THA-54 once they have obtained access.

The following forms are also provided on THA-85 by the Import and Export Inspection Division to complete these requests: Request for Officers at the Import Checkpoint to Inspect Drugs Brought or Ordered into the Kingdom for Research, Analysis, Exhibition, or Charitable Donation (Form N.D.W.) (THA-105), List of Items Attached to N.D.W. (THA-106), and Application Form for Medicine Importation (THA-84). See THA-85 for additional related forms, and THA-104 for information on submitting power of attorney to access the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54) as an agent.

Submissions

N.Y.M.1

As delineated in ClinImprtOrdr, the Thai FDA accepts paper and electronic clinical trial application submission packages for requests to import or order drugs for clinical research. However, paper applications are only to be submitted at the discretion of an agency officer when it is determined that the application process cannot be completed electronically via the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54) for Medicines Regulation Division review and approval (see Submission Content section for content details).

As per ClinImprtOrdr, for paper submissions, sponsors must submit two (2) original sets with real signatures of the completed N.Y.M.1 form (ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 2) and THA-18 (Appendix 2)) with the required attachments to the Thai FDA. For paper submissions, the applicant must also submit an MS Word template file for importing the data electronically, so that the file can be connected to the information in the drug importation and clinical research sections in the information system. A copy of all the submitted documents should also be provided in PDF format. G-CT-DIPApp also states that two (2) sets of the application package must be submitted to the Thai FDA. Per ClinImprtOrdr, if the Thai FDA reviewer determines that submitted documents require correction or additional documentation needs to be submitted, the applicant must make corrections/clarifications based on the evaluation results within the specified time by submitting a correction/clarification request form (see ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 12) and THA-18 (Appendix 12)).

Additionally, per ClinImprtOrdr, the non-local applicant must authorize a qualified person through a power of attorney to submit an application and respond to requests to provide clarification, amend, and/or receive documents related to the submission. The attorney-in-fact should be someone who has knowledge in pharmacy or a related medical field as well as an understanding of requests, permissions, etc. relating to the application submission and associated documentation. The scope and responsibilities of the attorney-in-fact must be specified in the authorization to include filing application submission clarifications and corrections. The authorization documentation should be submitted with the paper application. ClinImprtOrdr further notes that one (1) set of power of attorney submission documentation may only be used for one (1) application submission request.

ClinImprtOrdr also states that the application submission should include documentary evidence for quality control and drug production separated by drug. The identification of the manufacturer of each drug included in the submission must match the one specified in the Microsoft Excel files for the Logistics System (See ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 7) and THA-18 (Appendix 7) for the manufacturer’s form).

As indicated in ClinImprtOrdr and G-CT-DIPApp, Thai and English are the preferred languages for use in preparing an application package for requests to import or order drugs for clinical research. The following requirements are specified (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Research project name and summary of research project in Thai
Drug packaging documents for already registered drugs presented in Thai or English (Note: if drug formula documentation from abroad is in a foreign language other than English, then it should be translated into Thai or English and certified that the text matches the Thai/English language version)
Protocol synopsis in Thai
Detailed study protocol specification (completed version of study protocol) in Thai or English
Patient information sheet in Thai or translated to an appropriate language and certified the text matches the Thai version
Drug labels for every package size in Thai or English
EC approval document in Thai
Certificate of Free Sale in English and translated by a trusted certification authority and any other language in which it has been originally issued
Progress report in Thai
Additionally, as explained in THA-79, once the applicant has obtained permission from the Import and Export Inspection Division to access the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54), a drug import waiver application (N.Y.M.1) may be submitted electronically. Per THA-87, following official review of the submitted documentation, a response will sent within one (1) business day. THA-87 and THA-79 indicate that once the request is approved, a License Per Invoice (LPI) number will be used in making a goods declaration with the Thai Customs Department. See THA-48, THA-86, and THA-88 for additional information and instructions on submitting an LPI to Customs). Refer to THA-57 and THA-87 for detailed instructions on submitting a drug importation waiver request via THA-54.

P.Y.8

As indicated in ClinSampleProd, the Thai FDA also accepts paper and electronic clinical trial application submission packages for requests for permission to produce sample drugs for human research studies. However, if the electronic system is not available, the application must be submitted in paper form, along with the appropriate supporting documentation (see Submission Content section for content details). In the case of filing via the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54), information will be filled in the system in a P.Y.8. form, and the research project information will be created automatically. If the Thai FDA reviewer determines that submitted documents require correction or additional documentation needs to be submitted, the applicant must make corrections/clarifications based on the evaluation results within the specified time by submitting a correction/clarification request form (see ClinSampleProd (Appendix 8) and THA-76 (Appendix 8)). The paper documentation should be submitted to the New Drugs and Drug Research Promotion Group within the Medicines Regulation Division or submitted electronically via THA-54. When submitting a paper application, the applicant must also submit a template file for importing the data via THA-54 to serve as a starting point for operators in the electronic process and for use in overseeing the trial. A copy of all the submitted documents should also be provided in PDF format.

Additionally, per ClinSampleProd, the non-local applicant must authorize a qualified person through a power of attorney to submit an application and respond to requests to provide clarification, amend, and/or receive documents related to the submission. The attorney-in-fact should be someone who has knowledge in pharmacy or a related medical field as well as an understanding of requests, permissions, etc. relating to the application submission and associated documentation. The scope and responsibilities of the attorney-in-fact must be specified in the authorization to include filing application submission clarifications and corrections. The authorization documentation should be submitted with the paper application, or via the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54), if the application is being submitted electronically. ClinSampleProd further notes that one (1) set of power of attorney submission documentation may only be used for one (1) application submission request.

As indicated in ClinSampleProd, Thai and English are the preferred languages for use in preparing an application package to request permission to produce investigational drugs for clinical research. The following requirements are specified:

Research project name in Thai and English
Summary of research project in Thai
Drug labels for every package size in Thai or English
Patient Information Sheet in Thai
EC approval document in Thai
Complete research project details in Thai or English
Express Channel

Per the ExprssChnnl, a request for expedited review of N.Y.M.1 and P.Y.8 applications through an express channel may be submitted to the Thai FDA’s OSSC (THA-35) in the case of a public health emergency. The application should be submitted in document form with a CD containing the data file at the OSSC during business hours. See the Scope of Assessment section for more information on the express channel.

OSSC Contact Information for Application Submissions

Per THA-65 and THA-77, the following is contact information for submitting an application to the OSSC (THA-35) in person or via email, and for requesting permission to access the Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54):

One Stop Service Center (OSSC)
Building 6, 5th Floor
Food and Drug Administration Building
Ministry of Public Health
88/24 Tiwanon Road
Talat Khwan Subdistrict
Mueang District, Nonthaburi Province 11000

Email (E-Consult): econsultcenter@fda.moph.go.th
Phone: 02 590 7614 (Consultation E-service for general inquiries, reporting usage problems, and issues related to requesting permissions)

See also THA-52 for the Medicines Regulation Division staff list.

Ethics Review Submission

Per G-ResEthics, each institutional EC should establish its own requirements for protocol submission along with the required documents including the application, number of research protocol copies to be submitted, the patient information sheet, the informed consent form, and the case report form. Each EC should also communicate these requirements to personnel or staff within the institution.

According to THA-4, if a trial site is not affiliated with a Thai FDA-recognized EC, the investigator(s) usually needs to apply to two (2) ECs for approval—the unaffiliated local EC and a central EC approved by the Thai FDA. THA-1 further explains that both the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) and the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) are categorized as central ECs because they can accept all clinical research studies for review, regardless of the trial sites involved.

See THA-94 for a CREC-maintained list of local/institutional ECs, which also includes contact and submission information.

Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health

According to THA-13, the ECMOPH requires one (1) original and 20 copies of the protocol submitted in Thai, and one (1) copy submitted in English for review purposes.

Per THA-41, investigators can electronically submit applications to the ECMOPH to obtain approval for new research projects or to request other services via the ECMOPH e-submission login page (THA-40).

Central Research Ethics Committee

THA-95 indicates that all research project submissions should be sent via email to official@crecthailand.org. Contact the Project/Academic Coordination office via email (official@crecthailand.org) or phone (098-325-2765, 082-258-9529) with any questions. According to THA-47, the applicant may request additional information for new project submissions from Ms. Nattha Wongwutthisarot via email (natta@crecthailand.org) or phone (087 6744405).

Per THA-34, in the case where the research project has a complete research proposal in English, a shortened version of the research proposal should be provided in Thai as well. A protocol submission form from the EC of any institution involved in the research project can be prepared and submitted to the CREC for consideration.

See also THA-34 for detailed application package documentation submission requirements and THA-37 for a comprehensive list of all the CREC Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). See THA-93 for a list of CREC forms for submitting research project documents.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

N.Y.M.1

As per ClinImprtOrdr and G-CT-DIPApp, sponsors must submit the following documents to the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) to request a drug import waiver request (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Cover letter
Application for Permission to Import or Order Drugs for Research Purposes in the Kingdom (N.Y.M.1 form) (see ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 2) and THA-18 (Appendix 2))
Checklists and Attached Documents for N.Y.M.1 form (see appendices in ClinImprtOrdr and THA-18)
Drug labels for every package size in Thai or English
Package inserts (for registered drugs)
Prescriptions (for registered drugs)
Investigator’s Brochure (IB) (for unregistered drugs)
Informed Consent Form in Thai
Patient Information Sheet in Thai
Research project summary in Thai
Completed version of study protocol in Thai or English
Chemistry, manufacturing, and control (CMC) information
Ethics Committee (EC) approval from a Thai FDA-recognized institutionally-based EC and/or an independent EC. If waiting for approval from the relevant EC, instead submit the latest protocol version under consideration.
Estimates of the amount of study drug, comparators, or other goods to be imported
Certificate of Analysis
Certificate of Free Sale in English and other language used
Drug registration authorization document
Summary of product characteristics
Literature review
Description (name and content) and pictures of lab/materials to be imported
Power of attorney
Investigational medicinal product (IMP) information
Per ClinImprtOrdr, when an applicant authorizes a qualified person through a power of attorney to submit an application package, the following documents must also be included with the submission:

Copy of identity card of the grantor and the attorney-in-fact with signatures to certify that they are true copies
Stamp duty in the amount of 30 Baht per one (1) power of attorney designation
As delineated in G-CT-DIPApp, applicants are also required to submit the following documents to the Thai FDA regarding EC approval:

Protocol title
List of principal investigator(s) (PIs)
Proposed study site
List of documents reviewed and approved by the EC, including the document version
Period of approval and/or date of expired approval
As noted in ClinImprtOrdr, the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) may also establish an academic committee or subcommittee for certain drugs requiring special supervision (e.g., the Academic Subcommittee on AIDS Vaccine Trials to review AIDS vaccines, etc.). Therefore, when submitting an application to request permission to import or order a specialized drug for clinical research requiring this type of oversight, an additional approval letter from the relevant committee is also required. Additional information on obtaining the approval for the committee is not available.

P.Y.8

Per ClinSampleProd, applicants must submit the following documents to the Thai FDA to request permission to produce drug samples for the registration of drug formulas for human research studies:

Application for Permission to Produce Drug Samples for Drug Formula Registration (P.Y.8. Form) (see ClinSampleProd (Appendix 1) and THA-76 (Appendix 1))
Research project summary in Thai
Certification of compliance with the terms and conditions related to the production of drug samples for use in human research studies
Certificate of Compliance for Principal Investigators
Evidence of insurance or compensation
Power of attorney (for paper submissions)
A copy of the license to produce modern drugs (for paper submissions)
Drug labels for every package size in Thai or English
Copy of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Certificate
Drug leaflet (for bioequivalence study drugs)
IB (for research drugs)
Patient Information Sheet in Thai
EC approval from a Thai FDA-recognized institutionally-based EC and/or an independent EC, except in the case of waiting for approval from the relevant EC
Drug quality control and pharmaceutical production documentation
Documents approved by relevant technical committees (if any)
Complete research proposal in Thai or English
Document self-verification form (see ClinSampleProd (Appendix 7) and THA-76 (Appendix 7))
Per ClinSampleProd, when an applicant authorizes a qualified person through a power of attorney to submit an application package, the following documents must also be included with the submission:

Copy of identity card of the grantor and the attorney-in-fact with signatures to certify that they are true copies
Stamp duty in the amount of 30 Baht per one (1) power of attorney designation
As noted in ClinSampleProd, the MOPH may also establish an academic committee or subcommittee for certain drugs requiring special supervision (e.g., the Academic Subcommittee on AIDS Vaccine Trials to review AIDS vaccines, etc.). Therefore, when submitting an application to request permission to import or order a specialized drug for clinical research requiring this type of oversight, an additional approval letter from the relevant committee is also required. Additional information on obtaining the approval for the committee is not available.

Express Channel

Per the ExprssChnnl, a request for expedited review of N.Y.M.1 and P.Y.8 applications through an express channel must be submitted with a letter explaining the request, along with the standard application and accompanying documents, as applicable. Eligible applicants may request waivers of certain requirements based on appropriate and necessary reasons, clearly delineated in the form provided in the ExprssChnnl. See the Scope of Assessment section for more information on the express channel.

Ethics Committee Requirements

Per G-ResEthics, each institutional EC should establish its own requirements for protocol submission along with the required documents including the application, number of research protocol copies to be submitted, the patient information sheet, the informed consent form, and the case report form. Each EC should also communicate to personnel or staff within the institution.

Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health

Per THA-13, the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) requires investigators (applicants) to submit the following documentation for ethics approval:

One (1) original set and 20 copies of the protocol in Thai and one (1) copy in English for review
Ethical considerations
Combined information sheet and informed consent certificate for research participants
Budget details and funding source
Curriculum Vitae (CV) for each research team member
Letter of approval from implementing institution
Results of ethical review by EC of implementing institution, if available
Data collection/questionnaire tools
Letter signed by PI’s supervisor
For an international project, Thai and foreign PIs required for each side
Material transfer agreement for transfer of blood or biomedical samples
References
Refer to THA-13 for detailed ECMOPH submission requirements respectively.

Central Research Ethics Committee

According to THA-34 and THA-96, investigators applying for an initial research project review by the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) should submit the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Invoice/proof of payment (Word and PDF files required)
Book/research outline submission notes signed by investigator (Word and PDF files required)
List of Documents (AP 08-S04 (THA-96)) (Word and PDF files required)
Patient Information Sheet Checklist (AP 09-S04 (THA-109))
Proposal for Ethics Review for Biomedical Research Projects (CREC form AP 04-S04 (THA-102)) signed by investigator (Word and PDF files required)
Complete research proposal
Shortened research proposal in Thai, if the complete research proposal is in English
Informed consent form (ICF)/letter of intent to consent (a master version of the informed consent documents in English may be used for all institutions; alternatively, each institution may also use their own documents) (See also THA-46 for the CREC recommended ICF template)
Case report form
IB (including Investigator’s Guide; a certificate that the drug has been approved by the Thai FDA; a label in the case of a drug that has been registered with the Thai FDA; a toxicity guideline; and a package insert)
Other documents (including questionnaire or interview form; notebooks; research participant recruitment documents such as leaflets, posters, and public relations scripts; and other documents applicable to volunteers/research participants)
Various documents for notification
(Draft) Material transfer agreement (MTA) (must be uploaded according to each institution’s form)
(Draft) Research project budget
Investigator CVs and evidence of good clinical practice (GCP) and research ethics training
Conflict of Interest Form completed by PIs/co-investigators (CREC form AP 06-S04 (THA-103)) (separate documents by institution)
Refer to THA-34 for detailed CREC submission requirements. See THA-93 for a list of CREC forms for submitting research project documents.

Clinical Protocol

As delineated in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, and G-CT-DIPApp, the clinical protocol should include the following elements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Protocol summary/synopsis
General information (e.g., sponsor and investigator(s) name(s) and address(es))
Background information (e.g., investigational product name and description)
Trial objectives and purpose
Trial design
Number of trial participants
Participant selection/withdrawal criteria
Participant treatment
Safety and efficacy assessments
Quality control/quality assurance
Adverse event reporting requirements (See the Safety Reporting section for additional information)
Statistics and methods to track trial data
Sponsor specifications for direct access to source data/documents
Ethical considerations
Data management and recordkeeping
Financing and insurance details
Publication policy
Supplements
Information about each research facility in Thailand
Number of institutions participating in the research in Thailand
Other countries where the research project is being conducted
IMPs to be used
For complete protocol requirements, refer to ClinImprtOrdr and Annex 6 of G-ResEthics, which is directly based upon the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) and the ICH guideline Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (THA-27). Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. Both of these ICH guidelines are also referenced in G-ResEthics.

G-CT-DIPApp also provides protocol synopsis requirements for submission to the Thai FDA. Please refer to G-CT-DIPApp for detailed information.

In the instance of a multicenter clinical trial, G-ResEthics indicates that protocols submitted to each institutional EC should contain the same content and should specify the quality control techniques to ensure that the research practices are the same in each institution.

See THA-13 for ECMOPH protocol submission requirements, and see THA-37 and THA-95 for CREC requirements. See also THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

ClinImprtOrdr specifies that a drug import license application for clinical research purposes is submitted to the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) after the research project and all the research sites have been approved by the ethics committee (EC), or in parallel, pending review by at least one (1) EC involved in the study. Per ClinSampleProd and DrugProdReqs, the application to produce drug samples for the registration of drug formulas for human research studies must also be submitted to the Thai FDA either after the research project and all the research sites have been approved by an EC, or in parallel, pending review by at least one (1) EC involved in the study.

Regulatory Authority Approval

As specified in THA-78, the Thai FDA has 60 working days to evaluate an application to import or order drugs in the country for clinical research (N.Y.M.1); 60 working days to evaluate an application to produce drug samples to request modern drug registration for human research studies (P.Y.8); 20 working days to review an application to amend a N.Y.M.1 or P.Y.8 submission; one (1) working day to review an application for a certificate of pharmaceutical product (Certificate of Pharmaceutical Product/Certificate of Free Sale); and 30 working days to evaluate the accuracy and translation of a Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) assessment report from a Thai version to an English version.

Per G-CT-DIPApp, upon receipt of an application package, the Thai FDA’s One Stop Service & Consultation Center (OSSC) (THA-35) sends the application package to an officer in the Thai FDA’s International Affairs and Investigational Drug Section. The officer then screens the package for completeness and informs the eligible sponsor of the results within five (5) working days from the date the application was received. If deemed complete, the officer sends the package to the assigned technical reviewer to proceed. If the officer finds the package to be incomplete, a “Screening Result Notification form” will be sent to the applicant or the applicant’s attorney for correction. If the applicant or the applicant’s attorney fails to fully correct the package within five (5) working days, then the Thai FDA will send a rejection letter and return all the documents to the applicant. However, the applicant may later correct or amend the application package and resubmit it to the OSSC. Once the correction is completed, the officer will send the application package to the assigned reviewer to proceed.

Per G-CT-DIPApp, the reviewer then receives the application package and performs a technical assessment. If the reviewer determines the package is technically correct, then it will be forwarded to the Thai FDA’s Secretary-General for approval. If the reviewer finds the application package technically incorrect, then it will be forwarded to the Thai FDA’s Secretary-General for rejection. If the reviewer finds the technical information to be incomplete, then the applicant or the applicant’s attorney will be asked to clarify and/or submit additional documents/information. If the documentation or amended information is not submitted within five (5) working days, the Thai FDA will issue a rejection letter and return the package to the applicant. However, the applicant may resubmit a corrected package to the OSSC (THA-35) (timeline not specified in G-CT-DIPApp). If the applicant can completely correct the application package, the officer will forward the package to the assigned reviewer for re-assessment.

In addition, ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd further specify that once the Thai FDA receives the EC approval documentation, the agency will complete its review within 15 days. See also THA-18 (Appendix 13) and THA-76 (Appendix 9) for the form to submit results of EC review to the Thai FDA. Refer to the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for detailed submission requirements.

Per ExprssChnnl, a request for expedited review of N.Y.M.1 and P.Y.8 applications through an express channel may be submitted to the Thai FDA’s OSSC (THA-35) in the case of a public health emergency. The processing time is 10 days from the date of receipt of the request for entry into the system.

Ethics Committee Approval

The review and approval process by a Thai FDA recognized EC will vary by institution. However, according to THA-13, which provides the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) requirements, the ECMOPH review and approval process can take between two (2) and three (3) months.

Per G-ResEthics, each EC should establish its own requirements for protocol submission and timeline of review.

According to THA-98, submissions to the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) will be sorted by the secretary within five (5) days. As stated in THA-98 and THA-100, an expedited review will be completed within 10 working days, while a full board review will be completed according to each panel’s schedule. Per THA-100, exemption decisions are also made within 10 working days.

THA-98 and THA-100 indicate that for both types of reviews, the principal investigator (PI) or research coordinator will be informed of the CREC decision within five (5) working days after the decision is made. THA-100 further states that the PI must submit a revised protocol, if applicable, to the CREC according to the committee’s suggestions within three (3) working days. The CREC will review the revised protocol within 10 working days.

Per THA-98, the CREC will also send the result of its review and the approval letter, if applicable, to the local EC by email within five (5) days after the decision is made. CREC review of amendments follows the same timeline, except that expedited review will be completed within five (5) days.

THA-98 further indicates that the CREC Sorting Secretary will send the local EC a local issue assessment form, which the EC must respond to within 10 business days, or one (1) day prior to the meeting in which the research proposal is scheduled to be reviewed. Additionally, THA-98 notes that the PI, research coordinator, or site investigator must submit documents to the local EC per institutional requirements (within 30 days).

See THA-98 and THA-100 for additional information and graphics related to CREC and local EC review timelines.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

In accordance with ClinSampleProd, ClinImprtOrdr, and ECRegProc, a clinical trial can only commence after a sponsor receives approval of a drug import application for clinical research purposes or approval of a request to produce drug samples for human research studies from the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA), as well as approval to conduct the clinical trial from a Thai FDA recognized ethics committee (EC). No waiting period is required following the sponsor’s receipt of these approvals. (See also THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd.)

Additionally, the clinical trial should be conducted in compliance with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28). Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

Clinical Trial Agreement

G-ResEthics and THA-28 require the sponsor to sign a letter of agreement with the participating institution(s) before the trial begins. THA-28 also notes that any agreements between the sponsor and the investigator(s)/institution(s) and any other parties involved with the trial should be in writing either as part of the protocol or in a separate agreement.

Per THA-14, researchers should also abide by research obligations and agreements specified by and entered into with fellow researchers, funding agencies, and their affiliates.

Clinical Trial Registration

The ClinImprtOrdr application document checklist (Appendix 3) includes clinical trial registry information as one (1) of the items to be included in the application submission package, specifying that sponsors may register with either the Thai Clinical Trials Registry (TCTR) (THA-31) or a foreign registry. Sponsors may register in more than one (1) location.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

In accordance with ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-AEReptReqs, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Thailand’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a research participant to whom a drug product was administered, and which does not necessarily bear a causal relationship to the treatment
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – All dangerous and adverse reactions resulting from any dose of an investigational drug, for which it is at least reasonably likely that the adverse reaction is attributable to the drug being studied, that is, a relationship cannot be ruled out
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or is a congenital anomaly/birth defect
Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR) – An unexpected SAE/SADR given the nature of the research procedures and the population being studied
Unexpected Adverse Event/Adverse Drug Reaction – A reaction where the nature or severity is inconsistent with the applicable product information
Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. THA-28 also notes that the ICH Guideline for Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (THA-26) should be referenced for additional safety terms not defined in this list.

Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

As stated in G-AEReptReqs, the principal investigator (PI) is responsible for reporting all SAEs/SADRs to the sponsor and the ethics committee (EC) no later than 24 hours after the PI becomes aware of the event. The PI must also report all AEs/ADRs to the sponsor and the EC no later than seven (7) calendar days following first knowledge.

For safety reporting requirements specific to the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) and the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC), please see THA-13 and THA-37 respectively.

Sponsor Responsibilities

As delineated in THA-28, sponsors who are permitted to import or order drugs for research in Thailand and those who are licensed to produce drug samples for human research studies, must comply with the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA)’s safety monitoring and reporting requirements. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd state that the following information is viewed as urgent and is required to be reported:

SAEs/SADRs that never occurred before because the research team used safety reporting information from other countries to substantiate investigational product (IP) use
Other safety and security information useful to evaluating IP risk-benefit assessment, IP changes to the method of administration, or changes required to the overall research process
Unexpected SAE/SADR incidents that never occurred before, with an increased incidence or severity and considered to be of clinical importance
Significant harm to the participant, such as the ineffectiveness of an IP used to treat a life-threatening disease
Significant new information about experimental animal safety studies, such as carcinogenicity
Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, an ADR report must be filed in the following specified timelines:

Unexpected SAEs/SADRs that are fatal or life-threatening must be reported to the Thai FDA within seven (7) days from the first knowledge of the incident’s occurrence. Any additional relevant information should be sent within eight (8) days of the initial report
Unexpected SAEs/SADRs that are not fatal or life-threatening must be reported to the Thai FDA within 15 days from the date of SAE/SADR notification. A report must also be submitted periodically with any additional information.
AEs/ADRs that occur following the research participant’s participation in the study or after the study has been completed must be reported within 15 days from first knowledge of the event
According to G-AEReptReqs and G-ResEthics, the sponsor is also required to report all SUSARs to the EC as soon as possible, but no later than seven (7) calendar days for all fatal or life-threatening events, and no later than 15 calendar days for any non-fatal or non-life-threatening events. The sponsor must include the main points of concern. In addition, the sponsor must report to the EC any other non-local adverse reactions that may increase risks to participants within 15 days. Additionally, the sponsor must report any non-local SAEs/SADRs including SUSARs at least every six (6) months to the EC.

G-ResEthics and THA-28 state that the sponsor is responsible for expediting the reporting of all SUSARs to the investigator(s)/institution(s) participating in the trial, the EC(s), and to the Thai FDA. These reports should comply with G-AEReptReqs and the ICH Guideline for Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (THA-26). See G-AEReptReqs for detailed reporting requirements for the investigator and sponsor.

Other Safety Reports

THA-28 indicates that the sponsor should submit to the Thai FDA all safety updates and periodic reports as required by applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor is also responsible for the ongoing safety evaluation of investigational drug(s) and should promptly notify all concerned parties of findings that could adversely impact the safety of research participants, the conduct of the trial, or alter the EC’s approval or favorable opinion to continue the trial.

Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, annual and end of study safety reports must be provided to the New Drugs and Drug Research Promotion Group within the Thai FDA’s Medicines Regulation Division. The annual report must be submitted as a document within three (3) months of the one (1) year anniversary of the study, and the final safety report must be submitted as a document within six (6) months after the study has concluded. In addition, a list of all SAE/SADR incidents involving research participant(s) should be included in the annual report. A detailed summary table with the number of SAEs/SADRs organized by terminology (symptoms and diagnosis) should be provided. See Appendix 21 in ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 21 in THA-18) and Appendix 17 in ClinSampleProd (Appendix 17 in THA-76) for an example of the reporting form.

ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd further note that other reports must be made in writing with information such as summary of risk assessment issues and related details for submission to the New Drugs and Drug Research Promotion Group.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

Pursuant to ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, individual reports should be submitted electronically via the Thai FDA’s Health Product Vigilance Center (HPVC) (THA-30), unless the system is unavailable. The report may also be submitted as a document to the New Drugs and Drug Research Promotion Group within the Thai FDA’s Medicines Regulation Division (see THA-22).

Individual report data should include at minimum the following information:

Research participant information for those that can be identified (e.g., participant codes)
Investigational drugs used in research study
AE/ADR symptoms or results suspected of being connected to the drugs
Source of follow-up reports
Research project code or name
Reporting numbers (e.g., report number specified by sponsor)
Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, for research studies involving participants whose identities are disclosed, submitted AE/ADR reports should include the participant codes unless the Thai FDA’s Office of the Board of Directors deems it necessary to reveal the code immediately.

As per G-AEReptReqs, PIs should report all local SAEs to the sponsor and use the same form (specified by the sponsor) when reporting to the EC. Sponsors should report local SUSARs to the EC using the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS)’ form (THA-20).

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

As delineated in G-ResEthics, the investigator(s) must submit progress reports on the status of the trial to the ethics committee (EC) at the designated interval (not specified). For high-risk research protocols, investigator(s) should report the progress more frequently than for a low-risk protocol. The investigator should also provide a proposed schedule to submit a progress report to the EC from the date of protocol submission for ethical review, which should be at least once a year.

The International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) further notes that investigator(s) should submit a research summary report in writing to the EC once a year, or more often, as required by the EC. Investigator(s) should send a written report to the EC and the institution, if applicable, regarding any changes that may impact the research process and/or cause increased risk to the research participants. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

In addition, according to ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, the sponsor must submit a study progress report annually to the Director of the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA)'s Medicines Regulation Division between October 1 and 31 every year until the study ends. Per ClinImprtOrdr, for N.Y.M.1/investigational product (IP) import applications, this report should be submitted using the progress report form in Appendix 15 in THA-18, and accompanied by a delivery letter to the Thai FDA’s Director of the Bureau of Medicine using the format in Appendix 14 in THA-18. Per ClinSampleProd, for P.Y.8/IP sample production applications, the report should be submitted using the progress report form in Appendix 11 in THA-76, and accompanied by a delivery letter to the Thai FDA’s Director of the Bureau of Medicine using the format in Appendix 10 in THA-76.

Requests that already have information in the FDA’s Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54) must submit documents according to the system’s procedures. See Submission Process section for detailed information on submitting information via THA-54.

The ExprssChnnl indicates that for N.Y.M.1 and P.Y.8 applications reviewed through the express channel in the case of a public health emergency, reporting on the progress of research operations must be submitted monthly from the date of receiving permission. See the Scope of Assessment section for more information on the express channel.

Final Report

As specified in ClinImprtOrdr, in the event of early termination of the research study, the sponsor must submit a summary report (Appendix 19 of ClinImprtOrdr) to the Thai FDA within 60 days after the closeout of the last study site.

G-ResEthics also requires investigator(s) to submit a final report to the EC upon the trial’s termination.

For reporting requirements specific to the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH), please see THA-13. Also, refer to THA-37 for Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) reporting requirements. The ECMOPH and the CREC are both ECs recognized by the Thai FDA to review and approve clinical trial protocols.

Individual ECs should be contacted to confirm their specific requirements.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
In accordance with G-ResEthics, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), a sponsor is defined as an individual, company, institution, or organization that takes responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a clinical trial. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

Per G-ResEthics and THA-28, the Thai government also permits a sponsor to authorize a contract research organization (CRO) to perform one (1) or more of a sponsor’s trial-related duties and functions. However, the ultimate responsibility for the trial data’s quality and integrity always resides with the sponsor. Any trial-related responsibilities to be transferred and assumed by a CRO should be specified in a written agreement or contract. A sponsor may be domestic or foreign.

Per THA-65 and THA-77, although applicants residing outside Thailand cannot register directly with Digital ID (THA-89), they can request permission to authorize a juristic person who receives power of attorney to use the OSSC’s online consultation system (E-Consult) (THA-77) and to submit applications to the FDA’s Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54).

THA-28 also states that the sponsor may be a sponsor-investigator if the individual both initiates and conducts, alone or with others, a clinical trial, and under whose immediate direction the investigational product is administered or dispensed. The sponsor-investigator’s obligations include both those of a sponsor and those of an investigator.

According to THA-13, the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) requires the sponsor and/or CRO to be legally registered in Thailand. The ECMOPH is one (1) of the ethics committees approved by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) to approve clinical research protocols. See THA-13 for additional ECMOPH sponsor requirements.

Per ClinImprtOrdr, the sponsor is also referred to as the applicant or importer, and in ClinSampleProd, the sponsor is also referred to as applicant.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

In accordance with G-ResEthics and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical trial, and for ensuring that the investigator(s) are qualified by training and experience. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. THA-14 also states that researchers must have basic knowledge in the field of research.

Additionally, per THA-28 and G-ResEthics, the sponsor must define and allocate all study related duties and responsibilities to the relevant parties participating in the study. Prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s) and the institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and an investigator’s brochure.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

No information is available regarding foreign sponsor regulatory requirements.

Data Safety Monitoring Board

Although not specified as a sponsor requirement, G-ResEthics, G-AEReptReqs, and THA-28 encourage the establishment of a Data Safety Monitoring Board.

Multicenter Studies

As delineated in G-ResEthics and THA-28, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor, and if required, by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA), and are given ethics committee approval
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication between investigators is facilitated
Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Insurance

ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd specify that financing and insurance information should be included in the study protocol and protocol summary. If not included in the protocol and research project summary, a financial/insurance agreement should be attached separately in the application package as one (1) of the documents that the ethics committee (EC) considers approved or certified (e.g., Patient Information Sheets, etc.). G-ResEthics also states that the sponsor should provide insurance or indemnify the investigator/institution against claims arising from the trial, except for claims that arise from malpractice and/or negligence, if required by applicable regulatory requirements.

Compensation

Injury or Death

As specified in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), the sponsor or the designated contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for providing information related to compensation in the event of trial-related injuries or death to research participants and/or their legal heirs. ClinImprtOrdr further states that payment of compensation (if any) will be determined on a monthly basis to participants involved in the research. (See THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr.)

Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. The sponsor must also inform the participants of any available medical treatment in the event of trial-related injuries. MCEthics further indicates that medical practitioners are responsible for harm or damage because the research studies involving the participant were not the fault of the participant.

Trial Participation

As per G-ResEthics, Phase I trial participants should be compensated for travel, loss of work, or other expenses incurred while participating in the trial.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As stated in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and G-ResEthics, the sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol and the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)'s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28). Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

G-ResEthics and THA-28 explain that the sponsor is required to obtain agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities.

G-ResEthics and THA-28 further specify that the sponsor must also obtain the investigator(s) and the institution(s) agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with THA-28, applicable regulatory requirement(s), and the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and approved by the ethics committee (EC)
Comply with data recording and reporting procedures
License monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain essential documents until the sponsor informs them that they are no longer needed
Any agreements should be made in writing and the sponsor should sign the protocol or a separate agreement.

Pursuant to G-ResEthics and THA-28, QC should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been correctly processed. In addition, per THA-28, the sponsor should focus on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should also use a risk-based approach that includes:

During protocol development, identify processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results (Critical Process and Data Identification)
Identify risks to critical trial processes and data (Risk Identification)
Evaluate the identified risks against existing risk controls (Risk Evaluation)
Decide which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept (Risk Control)
Document quality management activities and communicate to those involved in or affected by these activities (Risk Communication)
Periodically review risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant (Risk Review)
In the clinical study report, describe the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarize important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken (Risk Reporting)
ClinImprtOrdr states that the trial must be conducted in accordance with the Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) principles.

Monitoring Requirements

G-ResEthics and THA-28 note that the sponsor may choose to perform a clinical trial audit as part of its QA system. The purpose of the audit should be to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, and other applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor should ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience, and the auditor’s qualifications should be documented. The sponsor must also ensure that the audit is conducted in accordance with the SOPs, the auditor observations are documented, and data are available as needed for the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA). No specific timeframe is provided for the audit process.

Per ClinImprtOrdr, the sponsor and investigator must facilitate the Thai FDA’s monitoring of the clinical trial to ensure compliance with GCP, GLP, safety reporting, and progress reporting requirements.

In addition, per THA-28, the sponsor should develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The extent and nature of monitoring is flexible and permits varied approaches that improve effectiveness and efficiency. The sponsor may choose onsite monitoring, a combination of onsite and centralized monitoring, or, where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan). See THA-28 for detailed information on the sponsor’s role in developing monitoring systems.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

G-ResEthics and THA-28 state that if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor should promptly inform the investigators/institutions and the regulatory authority(ies) of the termination or suspension and the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. The sponsor or the investigator/institution should also promptly inform the EC and provide the reasons for the study’s termination or suspension.

G-CT-DIPApp also specifies that in the event of the premature discontinuance of a trial, the Thai FDA must be notified no later than 30 working days after the date of discontinuance. G-CT-DIPApp further notes that a corresponding notification letter referring to the related approved import license along with supplemental documents as indicated in Appendix 13 is needed, and a corresponding notification letter along with supplemental documents as indicated in Appendix 14 is needed. (Note: Appendices 13 and 14 as referenced in G-CT-DIPApp are only available in the ClinImprtOrdr.) As stated in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, at the conclusion or termination of a clinical trial, a summary report must also be submitted within 60 days after the closeout of the last study site. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd further explain that details of remaining medicines to be destroyed and evidence supporting the destruction or return of the study drugs should also be included (Appendix 20 in ClinImprtOrdr and Appendix 16 in ClinSampleProd each contain a sample notification form required to be completed when terminating a research project). (See also THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr.)

Per G-CT-DIPApp, after the import license is granted, the applicant must also notify the Thai FDA when the clinical trial has been discontinued in its entirety or at any clinical trial site for reasons not related to the safety of clinical trial, or if the trial has been discontinued prematurely.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

Per G-ResEthics and THA-28, when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor must ensure that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance, and that standard operating procedures are maintained for using these systems. Per THA-28, the sponsor’s approach to validate such systems should be based on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use and the potential of the system to affect participant protection and reliability of trial results. Refer to G-ResEthics and THA-28 for detailed information on electronic trial data systems. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd also note that sponsors should ensure that research facilities are prepared for inspections by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) by ensuring that research participant source data and case report forms are stored in electronically based data collection systems.

Records Management

As set forth in G-ResEthics and THA-28, sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application in an International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) region, until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications, or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of an investigational product’s clinical development. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed.

In addition, THA-28 states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Responsible Parties

The PDPA defines the “data controller” as the person or juristic person having the power and duties to make decisions regarding the collection, use, or disclosure of the personal data.

Data Protection

Per the PDPA, the data controller must ensure that collected personal data remains accurate, up-to-date, complete, and not misleading. Personal data collection must be limited to the extent necessary in relation to the lawful purpose of the data controller. The data controller’s purpose for collecting data must meet one (1) of the purposes specified in the PDPA in order to be permitted to collect personal data, with the data subject’s explicit consent (see Section 23 of PDPA for details).

PDPA further specifies that personal data includes health and genetic data and requires the data subject’s explicit consent. Permissible personal data collection includes data collected in the interest of public health, such as protecting against cross-border dangerous contagious diseases or epidemics which may be contagious or pestilent, or ensuring standards or quality of medicines, medicinal products, or medical devices, provided there are measures to safeguard the rights and freedom of the data subject, including the confidentiality of personal data. Additionally, in the event that the data controller sends or transfers personal data to a foreign country, the destination country or international organization that receives such personal data must have an adequate data protection standard, and must be carried out in accordance with the rules for personal data protection as prescribed by the Personal Data Protection Committee (PDPC). See PDPC-Estab for additional information on the PDPC. Refer to the PDPA for a detailed list of permissible data collection purposes.

As set forth in the PDPA, the data controller is responsible for the following duties:

To provide appropriate security measures for preventing the unauthorized or unlawful loss, access to, use, alteration, correction, or disclosure of personal data; such measures must be reviewed when necessary, or when technology has changed in order to efficiently maintain proper security and safety, and also comply with the minimum standard specified by the PDPC
In the case of personal data being provided to other persons or legal persons other than the data controller, the data controller must take action to prevent such person(s) from using or disclosing the personal data unlawfully or without authorization
Establish an examination system for personal data erasure or destruction when the retention period ends, when the personal data is irrelevant or beyond the purpose necessary for which it has been collected, when the data subject has requested to do so, or when the data subject withdraws consent, except where the retention of such personal data is for the purpose of freedom of expression
Notify the PDPC of any personal data breach without delay and, where feasible, within 72 hours after having become aware of it, unless such breach is unlikely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of the persons whose data have been breached
Refer to the PDPA for additional information on data controller responsibilities. See also PDPC-Breach, G-PDPBreaches, THA-15, THA-10, and THA-17 for data controller guidelines on assessing data breach risks and applicable PDPC reporting requirements.

As described in the PDPA, with regard to personal data record management, the data controller must maintain, at least, the following records in order to enable the data subject and the PDPC to monitor in either written or electronic form the following: the collected personal data; the purpose of the collection of personal data; data controller details; personal data retention period; rights and methods for access to the personal data, including the conditions regarding the person’s right to access their personal data and the conditions to access such data; personal data use or disclosure; rejection of or objection to a request for personal data; and details of the appropriate personal data security measures.

Per the PDPA, the data protection legislation states that a data protection officer must be designated in the event the data controller/data processor is deemed a public authority per the PDPC; if the activities of the data controller/data processor in the collection, use, or disclosure of personal data, or the system itself, requires regular monitoring, due to the large quantity of personal data; or, if the core activity of the data controller/data processor is the collection, use, or disclosure of personal data for which the explicit consent of the data subject has not been obtained. See the PDPA for guidance related to data protection officers. See also THA-61 for a detailed guidance on the PDPA.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

The PDPA states that the data controller must not collect, use, or disclose personal data, unless the data subject has given consent prior to or at the time of such collection, use, or disclosure, except in the case where the data controller is permitted to do so by the provisions of the PDPA or any other laws. These cases may include the preparation of historical documents or public interest archives, research, or statistics, or preventing or suppressing a danger to a person’s life, body, or health.

The PDPA specifies that a request for consent must be made explicitly in a written statement or via electronic means unless consent cannot be done by those means. In addition, the data controller must inform the data subject of the purpose for collecting, using, or disclosing the subject’s personal data. The request for consent must be presented in an easily accessible and intelligible form and with statements using clear and plain language that is neither deceptive nor misleading to the data subject. The data controller must also ensure that the data subject’s consent is freely given.

The PDPA further explains that the data subject may withdraw consent at any time. The withdrawal of consent must be as easy as giving consent, unless there is a restriction of the withdrawal of consent by law, or the contract which gives benefits to the data subject. However, the withdrawal of consent must not affect the collection, use, or disclosure of personal data that the data subject has already legally consented to. If the withdrawal of consent will affect the data subject in any manner, the data controller must inform the data subject of the consequences of withdrawal.

Refer to the G-PDPConsent for detailed data controller guidance on obtaining consent, and the G-PDPNotif for data controller guidelines on the conditions to be assessed when notifying a data subject of the purpose and details related to collecting their personal data. THA-16 also provides useful information on these guidelines.

Consent for Processing Personal Data of Vulnerable Populations

In the event that the data subject is a minor who is not sui juris by marriage or has no capacity as a sui juris person under the PDPA, the request for consent from such a data subject must be made as follows:

In the event that giving consent is not an action that the minor is entitled to exercise independently, the consent of the holder of parental responsibility over the child must be obtained
Where the minor is below the age of 10 years, the consent must be obtained from the holder of parental responsibility over the child
In the event that the data subject is incompetent, the consent must be obtained from the custodian who has the power to act on behalf of the incompetent person
In the event that the data subject is quasi-incompetent, the consent must be obtained from the curator who has the power to act on behalf of the quasi-incompetent person
The above stated provisions also apply to the withdrawal of data consent of the data subject, the notice given to the data subject, the exercise of rights of the data subject, the complaint of the data subject, and any other acts under the PDPA for the data subject who is a minor, an incompetent person, or a quasi-incompetent person.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Thai clinical trials, a freely given informed consent must be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28). Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. MCEthics further states that a medical practitioner who conducts research studies and human experiments must obtain the consent of the participant and must be ready to protect the participant from harm arising from that experiment.

As per ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, and THA-28, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by an institutional ethics committee (EC) recognized by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA), and provided to the Thai FDA with the drug import license application to conduct a clinical trial. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the form.) (Note: The ICF is referred to as the Patient Information Sheet in G-CT-DIPApp.) (See also THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr.)

G-ResEthics and THA-28 state that the investigator(s) or the representative(s) must provide detailed research study information to the participant or legal representative/guardian. G-ResEthics and THA-28 also specify that the oral and written information concerning the trial, including the ICF, should be easy to understand and presented without coercion or unduly influencing a potential participant to enroll in the clinical trial. The participant and legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate. THA-11 also explains that patients who seek medical treatment have the right to receive truthful and adequate information about their illness, examination, treatment, advantages and disadvantages from the examination, and treatment from health professionals, in a language that patients can easily understand. Patients can then choose to make decisions about consenting or not consenting to the health professionals treating them, except in cases of urgent and life-threatening emergencies. THA-14 further states that researchers should take pains to explain the objectives and scope of their research to the human participants without deceiving or coercing them and they should not violate their participants’ rights as private individuals. Researchers should respect the rights and dignity of their human participants and enlist their consent prior to any research experiments involving human participants.

As per G-ResEthics and THA-28, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator(s), the institution, the sponsor, or their representatives from their liabilities for any negligence.

THA-13 provides informed consent documentation guidelines required by the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH), which is one (1) of the institutional ECs approved by the Thai FDA.

As noted in THA-34, the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) does not have its own ICF template and directs investigators to the template provided by the Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Thailand (FERCIT) (see THA-46 for document links).

Re-Consent

No information is currently available regarding re-consent requirements.

Language Requirements

As stated in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, the ICF content and accompanying information (Patient Information Sheet) should be presented in the participant’s language, must be submitted in Thai and translated to English, and certify that the text in other languages aligns with the Thai translation. G-CT-DIPApp also indicates that the Patient Information Sheet should be presented in Thai.

Documenting Consent

G-ResEthics and THA-28 state that the participant or legal representative/guardian, and the investigator(s) must sign and date the ICF. Where the participant is illiterate, or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, verbal consent should be obtained in the presence of and countersigned by an impartial witness. The NatHlthAct also indicates that the participant’s consent must be obtained in writing prior to conducting the trial.

Waiver of Consent

As per G-ResEthics, the EC should establish the conditions under which an informed consent discussion and/or signing the ICF can be waived. In these cases, the investigator must explore other means to protect the participant’s confidentiality. For example, if the investigator uses information from a participant’s medical records, the investigator must also ensure that the ICF is kept in the medical record by having the participant sign the form in advance and keep it in the records, or by having the participant sign the ICF later. The EC will then consider waiving the informed consent as long as the investigator provides proof that the participant is informed about the method for collecting the data, and that the participant’s privacy is protected.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Based on ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, the G-ResEthics, and the G-CT-DIPApp, the informed consent form (ICF) (also referred to as the Patient Information Sheet in G-CT-DIPApp) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study purpose and objectives
The expected duration of research participant’s involvement in the trial
Experimental aspects of the study
The participant’s responsibilities in participating in the trial
Any expected risks or discomforts to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
Disclosure of alternate procedures or treatments available to participants, including the benefits and risks
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
The research procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The expected benefits that can be obtained from the study; if no benefit is expected, the participant should be made aware of this
Compensation and/or treatment available for the participant in the case of trial-related injury
Payment of compensation (if any) determined on a monthly basis to research participants
Various expenses (if any) for research participants
That participation is voluntary, and that the participant may refuse to participate or withdraw from the study at any time without guilt or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled
That the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA), research investigators, the ethics committee (EC), and regulatory agencies are permitted to directly inspect participant’s original medical records to validate the accuracy of clinical research procedures and/or other information without violating the participant's right to maintain confidentiality beyond the limits allowed by laws and regulations, and that, by signing a written ICF, the participant or legal representative/guardian is authorizing such access
The extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained
That the participant or legal representative/guardian will be notified in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the study which may affect the participant's willingness to continue
Individuals to contact for further information regarding the trial, the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without consent
Estimated number of participants participating in research for the entire project, and the number of participants at each institution in Thailand
THA-13 provides information sheet guidelines required by the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH), which is one (1) of the institutional ethics committees approved by the Thai FDA.

As noted in THA-34, the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) does not have its own ICF template and directs investigators to the template provided by the Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Thailand (FERCIT) (see THA-46 for document links).

See the Vulnerable Populations and Consent for Specimen sections for further information. See also Appendix 11 (Part 4) in THA-18 and Appendix 7 (Part 4) in THA-76 for a checklist of items to be included in the ICF.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

In accordance with G-ResEthics and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), Thailand’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. The Declaration of Rights and Code of Conduct for Patients (THA-11) also states that every patient has the fundamental right to receive professional medical care and health care from health professionals without discrimination as provided for in the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand (B.E. 2560). Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, THA-28, the NatHlthAct, and G-CT-DIPApp, state that a participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) (also referred to as the Patient Information Sheet) and during the informed consent process.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and THA-28, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled. NatHlthAct also states that the participant may withdraw consent at any time. THA-11 similarly states that the patient has the right to be fully informed in order to make a decision to participate or withdraw from being a participant in a health practitioner’s research.

The Right to Information

As delineated in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, the NatHlthAct, G-CT-DIPApp, and THA-28, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study. THA-11 states that patients who seek medical treatment have the right to receive truthful and adequate information about their illness, examination, treatment, advantages and disadvantages from the examination, and treatment from health professionals, in a language that patients can easily understand. Patients can then choose to make decisions about consenting or not consenting to the health professionals treating them, except in cases of urgent and life-threatening emergency.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and THA-28, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. In addition, per G-ResEthics, which incorporates the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki (THA-45), every precaution should be taken to respect the privacy of the participant, the confidentiality of the participant’s information, and to minimize the impacts of the study on the participant. THA-11 further states that unless the patient’s permission or approved legal authorization is obtained, healthcare personnel cannot disclose the patient’s information.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and THA-28 state that the research participant or the legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries. THA-11 similarly indicates that every patient has the right to know the name, surname, and profession of the healthcare personnel in charge.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

G-ResEthics states that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of the participant’s health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society. THA-14 explains that researchers should take full responsibility for the impact and consequences of their research regarding themselves, their research participants, and society at large.

(See the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.)

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Per the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), research participants involved in clinical research under emergency circumstances are viewed as vulnerable and should be provided additional protections to ensure their safety and well-being. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. In addition, per the Declaration of Rights and Code of Conduct for Patients (THA-11), patients who are in a life-threatening condition are entitled to immediate, urgent assistance from a healthcare practitioner as required, regardless of whether the patient requests assistance.

THA-28 explains that in an emergency, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) cannot be obtained from the research participant, the consent of the legal representative/guardian should be obtained. If prior consent cannot be obtained from the legal representative/guardian, the participant’s enrollment should follow measures specified in the protocol, and/or elsewhere, to ensure compliance with ethics committee (EC) and other applicable regulatory requirements. Documented EC approval to protect the participant’s rights, safety, and well-being must also be obtained. The participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible and provide consent. Consent should also continue to be obtained throughout the trial as appropriate per THA-28. However, THA-11 further notes that except in an emergency, every patient has the right to obtain sufficient information regarding their illness from healthcare personnel prior to deciding to allow any treatment.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Overview

As per G-ResEthics and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), in all Thai clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

G-ResEthics characterizes vulnerable populations as those who are dependent on others and are unable to express their opinion freely or make their own decisions. These may include hospitalized patients, prisoners, children, the mentally impaired, critically ill and psychotic patients, pregnant women, and the disadvantaged. THA-28 adds that other vulnerable participants may include drug company employees, soldiers, prisoners, patients with incurable diseases, emergency patients, unemployed or poor people, members of minority groups, the homeless, immigrants, and young people who are unable to give consent on their own.

The G-ResEthics specifies that trials involving vulnerable persons must meet the following requirements:

Irrefutable rationale for conducting research clearly explained in the protocol
Precautions against possible physical and mental harms exercised
Appropriate research procedures used
Ensure that, as applicable, the participant’s parents or legal representative/guardian are fully informed about the study
Proof that the participants are voluntarily participating in the study
Ensure that the possible risks should not be greater than minimal when a study will not have a direct health benefit to the vulnerable group, unless the ethics committee permits a greater than minimal risk study to be conducted
See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
According to the ThaiCode, a person ceases to be a minor and attains majority at 20 years of age, or if the person gets married before age 20. THA-13 and THA-92 indicate that the age suitable to give consent is 18 years or older. The Declaration of Rights and Code of Conduct for Patients (THA-11) also indicates that a child is someone under 18 years of age.

As set forth in G-ResEthics, when the research participant is a minor, informed consent should be obtained from the parents, guardians, or legal representatives. Additionally, precautions against possible physical and mental harms should be exercised. Furthermore, the rights of the minors should be respected for their voluntary decision to participate in a clinical study. THA-11 similarly indicates that parents or legal guardians may exercise their rights on behalf of a child patient who is not over 18 years of age.

The International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) states that when a clinical trial includes minors, the minor should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with the minor’s understanding and, if capable, the minor should sign and personally date the written informed consent. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

Assent Requirements

THA-13 specifies that assent is required for minors seven (7) through 18 years of age. Different assent forms should be created for the following age groups: seven (7) to 13 and over 13 until 18. However, as per THA-92, the principles of requesting informed consent in children are as follows:

For children under seven (7) years old, a consent form must be obtained from the parents/guardians
For children seven (7) to 12 years old, an assent form in language that is easy for the child to understand must be obtained along with a consent form from the parents/guardians
For children 13 to 17 years old, a consent form must be obtained from the child and the parents/guardians (the consent form is the same for each party)
Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
As per G-ResEthics, any Thai clinical studies involving pregnant women and fetuses require additional safeguards to ensure that the research conforms to appropriate ethical standards and upholds societal values. Adequate information on the safety and impacts to the fetus should also be made available.

In addition, the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) indicates that the informed consent form should include a statement on the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
According to G-ResEthics, prisoners are considered vulnerable because incarceration could affect their ability to make a voluntary decision regarding participation in research. A research study involving prisoners should ensure that these prospective participants are informed and are given the opportunity to make their own decisions without any interference from a higher authority.

Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), which includes prisoners in its description of vulnerable populations.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Per G-ResEthics, informed consent should be obtained from the legal representatives or guardians of participants for studies involving psychiatric or mentally incapacitated patients. The Declaration of Rights and Code of Conduct for Patients (THA-11) also states that parents or legal representatives may exercise their rights on behalf of a physically or mentally handicapped child patient who cannot exercise their rights on their own.

As further explained in MentalHlthAct, any research to be conducted with patients who are mentally impaired have the right to:

Receive treatment according to medical standards that protect human dignity
Have information about their illness and treatment kept confidential other than what is required to be disclosed by law
Sign an ethics committee (EC) approved consent form prior to participation
Receive equal access to state health insurance and social security systems
In addition, MentalHlthAct prohibits disclosure of health information of mentally impaired participants in a manner that may damage the individual, except in the event that the patient or others may be in danger, for public safety, or specific laws require this information to be disclosed.

MentalHlthAct also states that any research involving patients who are mentally impaired can only be performed after obtaining their consent, EC approval, and approval from other relevant authorities to conduct the study. The patient’s approval may be revoked at any time. Treatment may only be administered once the patient has been informed as to why the treatment is necessary and provided with the details and benefits prior to giving consent. In the case of a patient under 18 years old, or one who lacks the ability to make decisions, the patient’s parent or legal guardian should provide consent. If the patient is to be admitted to a public hospital or treatment facility, signed consent is necessary. Research is permitted in the case of patients with mental impairments who are either facing dangerous conditions or compulsory treatment is required.

In addition, the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) indicates that when a clinical trial includes participants who can only be enrolled in the trial with the consent of the participant’s legal representative/guardian (e.g., those with severe dementia), the participant should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with the participant’s understanding and, if capable, the participant should sign and personally date the written informed consent. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
In accordance with G-ResEthics and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), an investigational product is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes a product with a marketing authorization when it is used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form, when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

G-ResEthics states that an investigational drug used in a clinical trial falls into one (1) of four (4) categories:

New drugs
Unregistered drugs in Thailand
Drugs registered by the national drug authority, but being studied in new doses or indications not previously approved
Locally produced drugs that require efficacy testing
Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Manufacturing

According to the DrugAct, ClinSampleProd, and ClinImprtOrdr, the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) in Thailand. The Thai FDA will approve the manufacture of an IP after the clinical trial application has been approved.

As explained in ClinSampleProd, the Thai FDA’s approval of a request to manufacture drug samples for investigational purposes is obtained using the P.Y.8 form (ClinSampleProd (Appendix 1) or THA-76 (Appendix 1)).

ClinSampleProd specifies that the following information must be included with the P.Y.8 form (Appendix 1):

Detailed list of manufactured drugs
Appearance and color of medicine
Number or quantity to be produced
Quantity of drug ingredients (must be reported in metric units or in a percentage)
Packaging size (packaging details)
Specifying if drug samples are for human research studies or cases other than human research studies
Drug label (two (2) copies)
Medicine package document (two (2) copies)
Other documents in the case of producing drug samples for human research studies
See also the Appendix 6 (Evidence of Drug Quality Information) in ClinSampleProd and (THA-76 (Appendix 6)) for additional requirements included on this form.

ClinSampleProd and ClinImprtOrdr, also state that the IP must be manufactured in accordance with good manufacturing practice (GMP) guidelines.

In addition, per ClinSampleProd, following the Thai FDA’s approval to manufacture IP samples, the applicant must also obtain approval prior to implementing changes in the following categories:

Changes that must be notified
Changes that require a change request to be submitted before proceeding, and
Changes that require a new production permit request to be submitted
ClinSampleProd indicates that when the change complies with one (1) of the listed categories, the applicant should:

Prepare documents and evidence according to the document self-check form for requesting changes using the Appendix 13 form or THA-76 (Appendix 13)
Submit a request to amend the details regarding permission using the Appendix 14 form or THA-76 (Appendix 14) (1 set)
Per ClinSampleProd, along with the Appendix 14 form, the applicant should attach relevant documents showing the revised section(s) and one (1) set of power of attorney documentation for each paper submission. ClinSampleProd notes that one (1) request can only change one (1) main issue. For example, in the case of requesting to extend the validity of medicines, this is a change in quality and results in a new expiration date label to be submitted in one (1) request. Additionally, for amendment requests that refer to information already submitted via the FDA’s Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54), the applicant must submit documents according to the system's procedures.

For changes that require the Thai FDA’s Medicines Regulation Division to be notified, ClinSampleProd states that the applicant should submit a letter of explanation, refer to the sample drug production license for human research studies that has been received, and attach related documents showing the revised sections or other information that needs to be notified as detailed in the Appendix 15 form or THA-76 (Appendix 15).

Import

As delineated in ClinImprtOrdr, the Thai FDA is also responsible for authorizing the import of IPs. The Thai FDA’s approval of a drug import license application for clinical research purposes serves as the import license using the N.Y.M.1 form (ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 2) and THA-18 (Appendix 2)). Per DrugImprtRules-1989 and DrugImprtRules-2009, all requests approved by the Thai FDA to order or import drugs into the country for research purposes are exempt from registration.

According to ClinImprtOrdr and THA-18, the following documents are also required to be submitted to the Thai FDA:

Import license application/N.Y.M.1 (ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 2) and THA-18 (Appendix 2))
Summary of research project in Thai
Ethics committee (EC) approval letter
Patient Information Sheet in Thai
Complete research project details in Thai or English
Drug labels for every package size in Thai or English
Drug documentation (for drug formulas that have already been registered)
Investigator’s brochure (IB) (for drugs not yet registered)
Pharmaceutical quality control and production documents
Drug name(s) (including dosage form, quantity, and details of every packaging size)
ClinImprtOrdr also states that the quantity of the IP must be calculated based on the number of study participants of each institute for the whole study duration in accordance with the information in the study protocol. The amount of the IP cannot exceed 20% to cover drug damage. Please refer to ClinImprtOrdr for more detailed IP supply requirements.

In addition, per G-CT-DIPApp, after the import license is granted, the applicant must inform or request permission from the Thai FDA prior to initiating the following:

Changes to clinical trial drug supplies
Changes to an approved protocol (protocol amendment) or changes related to or affecting participant safety
In cases where the sponsor is required to immediately make one (1) or more amendments because the clinical trial or the use of IP in the trial endangers the health of a clinical trial participant or other person, the applicant may immediately make the amendment without prior review by the Thai FDA. A corresponding notification clearly identifying the change and the rationale for immediate implementation of the change must be filed within 15 working days after the amendment implementation date. A corresponding notification letter referring to the related approved import license (see ClinImprtOrdr (Appendix 2) and THA-18 (Appendix 2) for N.Y.M.1 form), along with supplemental documents as stated in Appendix 12, are also required. (Note: The Additional Amendment/Clarification Request Form referenced in G-CT-DIPApp as Appendix 12 is only available in ClinImprtOrdr and THA-18 (Appendix 12))
Furthermore, per G-CT-DIPApp, after the import license is granted, the applicant must also notify the Thai FDA in the following cases:

Changes to the protocol that do not affect the safety of the trial participants
When the clinical trial has been discontinued in its entirety or at any clinical trial site for reasons not related to the safety of clinical trial participants
IB changes
Chemistry and manufacturing or quality changes that do not affect drug quality or safety
Premature discontinuation of a trial (See the Risk & Quality Management section for detailed notification requirements)
See the Scope of Assessment section for more information on N.Y.M.1 applications and the Regulatory Fees section for information on IP import fees. See also the Submission Process section for instructions on submitting a drug import waiver request to the Thai FDA.

The DrugAct states that a license will remain valid until December 31st of the year of issue. The license holder who would like to renew the license must file an application for renewal prior to the license expiration date. Once the renewal application has been filed, the license holder may continue to conduct business unless the renewal request is denied. A license holder whose license has expired for not more than one (1) month may file an exemption indicating the reason for obtaining a license extension. However, an application renewal request submitted after one (1) month from the date of license expiration is not permitted. In the event that the Thai FDA does not issue or grant a license renewal request, the applicant may appeal in writing to the Minister within 30 days from the date of receiving the notice rejecting the request. The applicant may obtain a temporary license to operate the business until a final decision is issued by the Minister.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Investigator's Brochure

In accordance with ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), the sponsor or the designated contract research organization (CRO) is responsible for providing the investigators with an Investigator’s Brochure (IB). The IB must contain all of the relevant information on the investigational product(s) (IPs) obtained through the earlier research phases, including preclinical, toxicological, safety, efficacy, and adverse events data. The sponsor should also update the IB as significant new information becomes available. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd further state that the IB should comply with the current version of THA-28. Per ClinImprtOrdr, the sponsor is also referred to as the applicant or importer.

As specified in G-ResEthics, ClinImprtOrdr, and ClinSampleProd, and in accordance with THA-28, the IB must provide coverage of the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation parameters
Non-clinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects of IP in humans (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; regulatory and post marketing experiences)
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator(s)
Bibliography
See Section 7 of THA-28 for detailed content guidelines.

ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd also indicate that evidence must be provided that the IB has been submitted to the ethics committee. In addition, per G-CT-DIPApp, the applicant must notify the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) of changes to the IB after the import license is granted.

Quality Management

ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd also state that the IP must be manufactured in accordance with good manufacturing practice (GMP) guidelines.

As stated in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and the DrugAct, the Thai FDA requires the manufacturer to provide the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Evidence of manufacture under conditions compliant with current GMPs
A Certificate of Analysis for each batch of IPs (must be in Thai if the manufacturer is foreign)
A drug registered in a foreign country is required to have a Certificate of Product (CPP)/Certificate of Free Sale (CFS)/evidence of registration from the Drug Control Department from that country and certified by a qualified translator
A Certificate of Free Sale
In the case that the product is approved for marketing authorization in Thailand, provide a copy of the certificate of drug registration and evidence that the imported drug and the registered drug are produced by the same manufacturer
Per G-CT-DIPApp, the chemistry, manufacturing and control (CMC) information for an IP submission to the Thai FDA must comply with specific requirements for a new chemical entity. Depending on the phase of the clinical trial, the completed CMC template, as well as the following additional quality information as outlined in the template, must be submitted (Note: The appendices referenced in G-CT-DIPApp are only available as Appendices 7 and 8 in the ClinImprtOrdr and Appendices 7 and 8 in THA-18.)

Additionally, per ClinImprtOrdr, in cases where an applicant submits “Drug quality control and production documents” for drug formulas registered in Thailand, the drug documentation approved by the Thai FDA must be used. When the “Drug quality control and production documents” are for drug formulas registered in other countries, the drug documentation of the specific country should be used. If the documentation is in a language other than English, it should be translated to Thai or English, and certified that the text in other languages matches the Thai/English language. See Appendix 7 of ClinImprtOrdr or THA-18 (Appendix 7) for additional information.

Per G-CT-DIPApp, after the import license is granted, the applicant must also notify the Thai FDA of chemistry and manufacturing or quality changes that do not affect drug quality or safety.

See also THA-18 and THA-76 for the forms included in the appendices in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd.

Refer to the Product Management section for additional information on IP supply, storage, and handling requirements, and the Submission Process and Submission Content sections for detailed application requirements.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Thailand must comply with the requirements set forth in ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, G-ResEthics, G-CT-DIPApp, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28). Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28. G-ResEthics and THA-28 state that the IP must be coded and labeled in a manner that protects blinding, if applicable. In addition, per G-CT-DIPApp, if a drug product is registered in Thailand, a certified copy of a certificate(s) of drug registration by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) must be submitted.

ClinImprtOrdr, ClinSampleProd, and G-CT-DIPApp specify that in general, primary and secondary labels must contain (at least) the following requirements (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

All containers and packaging of all sizes are to use the same format as the actual label
Thai language should be used, except for the drug name/drug code and research project sponsor information, where Thai or English language may be used; in the case of drugs administered by medical study personnel, the label information may be submitted in Thai or English
Drug name/drug code, strength, pharmaceutical form, drug delivery system, unit quantity; in the case of a blind treatment study, the label must specify: “Placebo or [Drug Name/Drug Code] + [Strength]”
Research project code or name
Production model and/or code number to identify components and packaging process
Participant number or treatment number and appointment number (if applicable)
Methods of drug use may refer to documentation specifically describing participants (such as drug use records) or to communicate how medical study personnel can correctly administer the drug product
Name, address, and telephone of the sponsor, contract research organization (CRO), or the investigator (main point of contact for clinical research product information and emergency treatment disclosure), unless the participant receives an identification card displaying this information (with attached documents) and is advised to keep this document in their possession at all times
Statement indicating “for clinical research purposes only” or in other words with the same meaning in the Thai language
Drug storage conditions
Period of use (use as appropriate within the expiration date or retest date) in months/years and in a manner that avoids ambiguity
Statement indicating “keep out of the reach of children” in Thai or in other words meaning the same in Thai, unless the participant is not going to take home the medicine
As described in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, primary labels where the primary packaging is always combined with the secondary packaging, should consist of (at least) the following:

Drug name/drug code, strength, pharmaceutical form, drug delivery system (the dosing route may not be established for the oral solid dosage form), unit quantity, in the case of blind treatment study, specify: “placebo or [drug name/drug code] + [strength]"
Research project code or name
Production model and/or code number to identify the components and packaging procedure
Participant number or treatment number and appointment number (if applicable)
Sponsor/CRO/investigator name
Refer to ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd for additional primary label requirements.

Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, drug labeling must be carried out in a facility licensed to manufacture drugs and in accordance with the DrugProdReqs (see Appendix 12). As indicated in ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, in cases where drug preparation for administration at a research site requires the application of new labels to the packaging used for administration (e.g., preparing or mixing injections, preparing drugs for immediate oral administration), the applicant must ensure that the principal investigator (PI) or designee:

Prepare label(s) or label image(s) with appropriate and accurate information for the purposes of the research project
Prepare a standard operating procedure (SOP) manual or a standardized method for preparing drugs and labeling drugs in accordance with current drug manufacturing practices and procedures
Ensure the SOPs are administered by a pharmacist or other health professional at the research site who has received appropriate training
Provide evidence to document that practices have been inspected by a second party under strict labeling control
Preserve evidence and record various related documents to support inspection by the authorized person or the Medicines Regulation Division
The applicant is not required to submit labels in this case with the application, but must ensure that the PI or designee complies with these requirements and is always available for inspection or inspection of the research.

Per ClinImprtOrdr, for labels on drugs authorized for importation or ordering into Thailand for research purposes and that have been submitted to the Medicines Regulation Division, the applicant may refer to the original application document if there is no change from the original submission. As described in ClinImprtOrdr, in the case of a request to change the information on the duration of drug use, an additional label indicating the new date and using the original production version should be added. The new label(s) or label image(s) should be submitted in the same format as the original label used, which may cover the original date. However, the new label must not cover the original production version for quality control reasons, and the labeling must be performed at a facility licensed to manufacture the drugs.

Similarly, per ClinSampleProd, for drug labels previously submitted to the Medicines Regulation Division to produce drug samples for human research studies, the applicant may refer to the original document, if it has not been amended. Additionally, the requirements for requesting a change to the period of use on the drug label also follow the same requirements as those delineated for ClinImprtOrdr.

Per ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd, if necessary, the applicant may request that the Medicines Regulation Division consider a waiver of drug label requirements in the following cases:

Information on drug labels for clinical drug research projects that are conducted in many countries and cannot be changed in a timely manner upon submission of the first authorization request (passing the application review and entry into the system)
Information on the label that may refer to other documents (e.g., reference method of dosage administration, record of drug use) should be attached to the reference document with an explanation
Additional labeling after the drug is brought into Thailand in order to comply with the requirements for research drug labels: a label(s) or label image(s) must appear in the same format as the actual label; information on the label that may refer to other documents, such as how to give medicine, reference to medication records, etc., by attaching the reference document with an explanation; the place of labeling is a licensed facility to produce the correct drug, or, if necessary, a waiver may be requested for the labeling operation to be in a controlled location instead. In such cases, labeling procedures must be performed by a pharmacist or other research site health professional, or by an appropriately trained research supervisor. Operational procedures and a record of practices should be prepared, and these documents should be checked by a second person. The labeling should be strictly controlled, and operations must be consistent with modern drug production manufacturing guidelines and procedures.
See Appendix 6 of ClinImprtOrdr, Appendix 6 of THA-18, Appendix 5 of ClinSampleProd, or Appendix 5 of THA-76 for the Application Form for Exemption from Drug Labeling Requirements on a Case-by-Case Basis.

ClinImprtOrdr and ClinSampleProd state that recommendations for drugs used as specified in the research protocol, for use in accordance with the indications registered in Thailand (which are procured from the Thai market and do not require further manufacturing or packaging), should include the following information on the original container (but not over the original label):

Sponsor, CRO, or investigator name
Research project code
Statements "for clinical research purposes only" or other words synonymous with the Thai language
Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

As defined in G-ResEthics and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28), the sponsor or the designated contract research organization (CRO) must supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the investigational products (IPs), including the comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable. The sponsor or the designated CRO should not supply either party with the IP(s) until approval is obtained from the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) and the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH), another ethics committee (EC) (e.g., the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC)), and/or the local EC. The ECMOPH and the CREC are both ECs recognized by the Thai FDA. Per ClinImprtOrdr, clinical trials in Thailand must comply with THA-28.

G-ResEthics and THA-28 specify that the sponsor or the designated CRO must ensure the following:

Timely delivery of the IP(s)
Records maintained for document shipment of the IP(s)
Written procedures including instructions for handling and storage of the IP(s), adequate and safe receipt of the IP(s), dispensing of the IP(s), retrieval of unused IP(s), return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor, and disposal of unused IP(s) by the sponsor
IP product quality and stability over the period of use
IP manufactured according to any applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP)
Proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP(s)
Acceptable IP handling and storage conditions and shelf life
Refer to the G-ResEthics and THA-28 for detailed, sponsor-related IP requirements. As defined in G-ResEthics and THA-28, the sponsor is also accountable for supplying the IP, including the comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable.

Record Requirements

As per G-ResEthics and THA-28, the sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and institution(s) in writing of the need for record retention and should notify the investigator(s) and institution(s) in writing when the trial related records are no longer needed. Additionally, the sponsor must ensure sufficient quantities of the IP(s) used in the trial to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary, and should maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics. All sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained for at least two (2) years after formal discontinuation of the trial or in conformance with applicable regulatory requirements.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
In Thailand, a specimen is generally referred to as biological material. As delineated in G-ResEthics, biological material is defined as original material, progeny, and unmodified derivatives. In the Material Transfer Agreement template provided in G-ResEthics, material covered by the agreement includes all living or dead biological materials and any replicated or derived cells or DNA molecules.

G-ResEthics collectively classifies biomedical research as those studies that include information from a participant’s medical records or databases; laboratory specimens; bodily fluids; human tissues; and studies about the physiology, biochemistry, pathology, biochemistry, and psychology of typical participants.

In addition, G-ResEthics specifically defines human tissue samples as anything being taken out or excreted from a human body or a corpse. These samples may also include other tissues, blood, secretions, and excretions from all organ systems to be used for the diagnosis of a disease or for other purposes.

Please refer to G-ResEthics for more specific definitions for selected terms including progeny and unmodified derivatives.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
Import/Export

No information is currently available regarding the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA)’s role in approving the import and export of biological specimens.

Material Transfer Agreement

G-ResEthics states that in the case of the transfer of biological materials, the sponsor must complete the Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) form (Annex 8) to obtain or transfer biological materials for research purposes. An MTA form must also be used to transfer human tissue samples to other institutions.

See also THA-13 for the Material Transfer Agreement and Material Transfer Record forms provided by the Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH).

Per THA-34, the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) requires investigators to include a (draft) MTA in the initial protocol submission package in cases where specimens are sent to an outside research institution, according to each institution’s form. This document will be used by the CREC for consideration, but it is not endorsed.

The ECMOPH and the CREC are both ethics committees approved by the Thai FDA to review and approve clinical trial protocols.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: August 27, 2025
In accordance with G-ResEthics, prior to collecting, storing, or using a research participant’s biological specimen(s), written consent must be obtained from the participant or legal representative.

As per G-ResEthics, the investigator(s) are responsible for clarifying to the participant and the legal representative whether the biological materials collected from the study will be destroyed. If the samples will be used, a clear explanation must be provided as to how the samples will be stored, plans for future use, and whether such use is limited. In addition, the investigator(s) must inform the participants whether any products will be derived from the biological materials collected during the study. (See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent).

G-ResEthics states that written consent should be obtained from the donor or the giver of the tissue samples. The general requirements for consent must be met, including the investigator(s) obtaining institutional ethics committee (EC) review and approval of the research protocol and for complying with ethical guidelines in compliance with the applicable laws and regulations when conducting research using tissue samples. The guidelines should provide procedures for tissue sample collection, processing, distribution, disposal, and storage for the duration of the research or for future use. The participant or the legal representative must be given detailed information about how the samples will be used and stored, and about their right to request the samples be destroyed when the research is complete.

In addition, per G-ResEthics, for retrospective studies using stored human tissue samples, the institution and the EC should establish the rules and regulations to decide when the investigator can waive a donor’s informed consent in order to use stored tissue samples for research. Refer to Section 7.5 of G-ResEthics for detailed information.

G-ResEthics states that the investigator or institution must obtain consent for human genetic research. Investigators and institutions must comply with numerous requirements to ensure participant consent, protection, and privacy rights are upheld with regard to the storage of genetic materials. See Sections 7.6 and 7.7 of G-ResEthics for detailed coverage of genetic research consent requirements.

As noted in THA-34, the Central Research Ethics Committee (CREC) recommends that investigators use the informed consent form (ICF) templates provided by the Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Thailand (FERCIT), including a broad ICF for the storage and use of data and biospecimens for future research (see THA-46 for document links). The CREC is one (1) of the ECs approved by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) to review and approve clinical trial protocols.

Requirements
(Legislation) Drug Act B.E.2510 (A.C. 1967) and its Amendments (DrugAct - Thai) (English-DrugAct - Google Translation) (Effective October 13, 2019)
National Assembly
(Legislation) Hospital Act (B.E. 2541) (HospitalAct - Thai) (English-HospitalAct - Unofficial translation) (March 15, 1998)
National Assembly
(Legislation) Mental Health Act (No. 2) (B.E. 2562) (MentalHlthAct - Thai and English) (2019)
National Assembly
(Legislation) National Health Act (B.E. 2550) (NatHlthAct - Thai) (English-NatHlthAct - Unofficial translation) (March 3, 2007)
National Assembly
(Legislation) Personal Data Protection Act, (B.E. 2562) (2019) and the Relevant Notifications of the Personal Data Protection Committee (PDPA - Thai) (English-PDPA – Google Translation) (June 1, 2022)
Office of the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Public Health
(Legislation) Thailand Civil and Commercial Code (B.E. 2468) (ThaiCode - Thai) (Effective January 1, 1925)
National Assembly
(Regulation) Medical Council Regulations on the Maintenance Medical Profession Ethics (B.E. 2549) (2006) (MCEthics - Thai) (Effective December 1, 2006)
Medical Council of Thailand, Ministry of Public Health
(Regulation) Notification of the Food and Drug Administration Re: Establishment of an Evaluation Channel Based on the Evaluation Results of the Quality Accreditation Agency, Ethics Review Committee (EC-QualAccredReq - Thai) (Effective September 26, 2019)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Regulation) Notification of the Food and Drug Administration Re: Rules, Procedures and Conditions for Accepting Ethics Committee for Research Involving Human Subjects (ECRegProc - Thai) (English-ECRegProc - Google Translation) (Effective November 13, 2018)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Regulation) Notification of the Foundation for Human Research Promotion in Thailand, M.S.T. 011/2565 Amending the Notification of the Fees for Ethical Consideration of Human Research (CRECFees - Thai) (English-CRECFees - Google Translation) (Effective July 6, 2022)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Regulation) Notification of the Medicines Regulation Division Re: Details of the Requirements for Importing or Ordering Drugs into the Kingdom for Clinical Research (N.Y.M.1 Applications) (ClinImprtOrdr - Thai) (English-ClinImprtOrdr - Google Translation) (Effective August 7, 2023)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Regulation) Notification of the Medicines Regulation Division Re: Details of the Requirements for the Production of Modern Drug Samples for Clinical Research (P.Y.8 Application) (ClinSampleProd - Thai) (English-ClinSampleProd - Google Translation) (Effective August 7, 2023)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Regulation) Notification of the Medicines Regulation Division Re: the Methods, Formats, and Supporting Documents for Requesting Approval for Clinical Research Drugs through the Express Channel (ExprssChnnl - Thai) (March 16, 2020)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Regulation) Notification of the Ministry of Public Health Re: Expenses to be Collected from Applicants for the Drug Approval Process (B.E. 2566) (ClinDrugFees - Thai) (December 2, 2023)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Regulation) Notification of the Ministry of Public Health Re: Rules, Procedures and Conditions for Importing or Ordering Drugs into the Kingdom Without Registration of the Formula, No. 14 (B.E. 2532) (DrugImprtRules-1989 - Thai) (August 1, 1989)
Ministry of Public Health
(Regulation) Notification of the Ministry of Public Health Re: Rules, Procedures and Conditions for Importing or Ordering Drugs into the Kingdom Without Requesting Registration of the Formula, No. 2 (B.E. 2552) (DrugImprtRules-2009 - Thai) (Effective July 9, 2009)
Ministry of Public Health
(Regulation) Notification of the Ministry of Public Health Re: Specifying Details on the Criteria and Methods for the Production of Modern Drugs and to Amend the Rules and Procedures for the Production of Traditional Medicine According to the Drug Act (B.E. 2559) (DrugProdReqs - Thai) (English-DrugProdReqs - Google Translation) (Effective May 18, 2016)
Ministry of Public Health
(Regulation) Notification of the Personal Data Protection Committee Re: Criteria and Procedures for Reporting Personal Data Breach Incidents (B.E. 2565) (PDPC-Breach - Thai) (English-PDPC-Breach - Google Translation) (December 15, 2022)
Personal Data Protection Committee
(Regulation) Notification of the Prime Minister's Office Re: the Appointment of the Chairman of the Committee and Qualified Members of the Personal Data Protection Committee (PDPC-Estab - Thai) (English-PDPC-Estab - Google Translation) (January 18, 2022)
Office of the Prime Minister
(Guidance) Guideline on Submission of Application for Drug Import Permit into Thailand for Clinical Trial (G-CT-DIPApp) (September 2009)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Assessing Risk and Reporting Personal Data Breaches (G-PDPBreaches - Thai) (English-G-PDPBreaches - Google Translation) (Version 1.0) (December 15, 2022)
Office of the Personal Data Protection Committee
(Guidance) Guidelines for Conditional Authorization of Advanced Medical Products (G-ATMPAuth - Thai) (October 24, 2024)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Guidance) Guidelines for Notifying the Purpose and Details of Collecting Personal Data from Personal Data Subjects Under the Personal Data Protection Act (B.E. 2562) (G-PDPNotif - Thai) (English-G-PDPNotif - Google Translation) (September 7, 2022)
Personal Data Protection Committee
(Guidance) Guidelines for Obtaining Consent from Personal Data Subjects Under the Personal Data Protection Act (B.E. 2562) (G-PDPConsent - Thai) (English-G-PDPConsent - Google Translation) (September 7, 2022)
Personal Data Protection Committee
(Guidance) Guidelines for Reporting Adverse Events from the Seminar “Achieving Guidance in Clinical Trial Safety Information Among Stakeholder” (G-AEReptReqs - Thai and English) (June 2011)
Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Thailand
(Guidance) The Ethical Guidelines for Research on Human Subject in Thailand, 2007 (G-ResEthics - Thai) (English-G-ResEthics - Official translation) (December 2007)
Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Thailand
Additional Resources
(Article) Amendments to Thailand’s Drug Act (THA-6) (May 21, 2019)
Homhuan, Atthachai; Tilleke & Gibbons
(Article) Clinical Trial Regulatory & Approval Process in Thailand (Part 1) (THA-1) (September 12, 2016)
Credevo
(Article) How to Request a License Per Invoice (THA-88 -Thai) (August 4, 2023)
FDA Story Company Limited
(Article) License Per Invoice (THA-48 - Thai) (English-THA-48 - Google Translation) (May-August 2014)
Chantarach, Rajitpan; Food and Drug Journal
(Article) Overview of Thai PDPC's Notification and Guidelines On Data Breaches (THA-15) (March 1, 2023)
Mirandah, Denise; Global Advertising Lawyers Alliance
(Article) PDPA Update - Thailand’s New Legislation on Personal Data Breach Notification (THA-17) (December 22, 2022)
Paiboon, Nonnabhat; Herbert Smith Freehills
(Article) Thailand: Medical Research, Pharmacovigilance, Data Management, And Data Privacy (THA-10) (May 27, 2022)
Formichella, John and Jamallsawat, Naytiwut; Formichella & Sritawat
(Article) Thailand: Newest PDPA Guidelines Issued by PDPC (THA-16) (September 15, 2022)
Anuktanakul, Jutharat; Charungkit-Anant, Koonlacha; Chueabunchai, Suphakorn; Laohapairoj, Pranat; Sombatsatapornkul, Theerapat; Chandler MHM Limited
(Article) Thailand’s Clinical Trial Regulatory Scenario: Update 1 (THA-3) (February 14, 2017)
Credevo
(Article) Thailand’s Latest Approved IRB List: Update 2 (THA-4) (March 27, 2019)
Credevo
(Article) The Ministry of Public Health Joins the Central Agency to Consider Human Research Ethics to Support the Consideration of Multi-institutional Research Projects (THA-63 - Thai) (February 6, 2022)
Hfocus.org news agency
(Article) The Ultimate Guide to the Thailand PDPA (THA-61) (August 2, 2022)
OneTrust DataGuidance
(Document) Account Details for the Foundation for the Promotion of Human Research in Thailand (THA-42 – Thai and English) (English-THA-42 – Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Document) Announcement of Document Processing Fees for “Request for Amendment of Certification Document” (THA-108 - Thai) (Effective December 1, 2023)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Document) Declaration of Rights and Code of Conduct for Patients (THA-11 - Thai) (English-THA-11 - Unofficial translation) (August 12, 2015)
Medical Council, Nursing Council, Pharmacy Council, Dental Council, Physical Therapy Council, Medical Technology Council, and Medical Practice Committee
(Document) Drug Import Exemption Application System (THA-87 - Thai) (July 2022)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Document) Guideline for Industry: User Manual of Thai FDA Skynet - Volume 2 Procedure for Medicinal Product's System: Appendix 12 - System for Importing or Ordering Drugs for Research Purposes into the Kingdom Without Registration of the Formula (THA-57 - Thai) (English-THA-57 - Google Translation) (Revision No. A12-20220705) (Date Unavailable)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Document) Guidelines and Procedures for Conducting Research on Human Subjects (THA-13 - Thai and English) (Date Unavailable)
Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health
(Document) Guidelines for Applying for Services and Granting Privileges to Health Product Consulting System (E-Consult) Service Recipients (THA-65 - Thai) (English-THA-65 - Google Translation) (2nd Revision) (December 22, 2022)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Document) Introducing the FDA Agency and General Registration Principles (THA-91 - Thai) (English-THA-91 – Google Translation) (March 9, 2017)
Assawakitwiri, Winit; Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Document) Local Ethics Committee Information (THA-94 - Thai) (Update 4) (Date Unavailable)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Document) Notification of New Guidelines for Conducting Multi-Institutional Research Projects (THA-97 - Thai) (English-THA-97 – Google Translate) (March 6, 2025)
Foundation for Human Research Promotion in Thailand, National Research Council of Thailand
(Document) Preparing for Use of the FDA E-Submissions System (THA-75 - Thai) (English-THA-75 - Google Translation) (August 22, 2023)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Document) Researcher’s Code of Ethics (THA-14 - Thai) (1998)
National Research Council of Thailand
(International Guidance) Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting (E2A) (THA-26) (Step 4 Version) (October 27, 1994)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (THA-45) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (THA-28) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) International Ethical Guidelines for Health-related Research Involving Humans (THA-7) (2016)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(International Guidance) Operational Guidelines for Ethics Committees that Review Biomedical Research (THA-64) (2000)
World Health Organization
(International Guidance) Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (THA-27) (Step 4 Version) (November 1995)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) About Us (THA-44 - English and Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) Acceptance of the Committee for Consideration of Ethics in Human Research - Form (THA-107 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Amendment Report Type (Site-Specific) (THA-99 - Thai) (May 16, 2024)
Foundation for Human Research Promotion in Thailand, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) CREC - Calendar (THA-101 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) CREC - Flow Chart of Project Review Process (THA-98 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) CREC - Project Submission Process with CREC (THA-100 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) CREC - Form for Submitting Research Project Documents (Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) Version 5.1, Dated July 24, 2024) (THA-93 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) CREC - Project Submission Channels (THA-95 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) CREC - Research Project Submission Guide (THA-47 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) Digital ID (THA-89 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Electronic Government Agency
(Webpage) E-Consult System Services (THA-77 - Thai) (February 10, 2025)
Division of Innovative Health Products and Services, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) - E-Submission Login (THA-40 - Thai) (English-THA-40 - Google Translation) (Current as of June 17, 2022)
Ministry of Public Health
(Webpage) Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) - Frequently Asked Questions (THA-41 - Thai) (English-THA-41 - Google Translation) (Current as of June 17, 2022)
Ministry of Public Health
(Webpage) Ethical Review Committee for Research in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health (ECMOPH) - Roles and Responsibilities (THA-39 - Thai) (English-THA-39 - Google Translation) (Current as of June 17, 2022)
Ministry of Public Health
(Webpage) Forms for Pharmaceutical Products (THA-85 - Thai) (March 31, 2025)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Frequently Asked Questions - Research Ethics (THA-92 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
National Science and Technology Development Agency
(Webpage) Health Product Vigilance Center (HPVC) (THA-30 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Health Product Vigilance Center, Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Importing Drugs for Other Purposes (THA-79 - Thai) (February 21, 2025)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Informed Consent Form Templates and Checklists (THA-46 - Thai and English) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Forum for Ethical Review Committees in Thailand
(Webpage) Introducing Online Consultation System (E-Consult) (THA-51 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) List of Human Research Ethics Committees Accepted by the FDA (THA-90 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Medicines Regulation Division - About Us (THA-49 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Medicines Regulation Division - Contact Us (THA-72 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Medicines Regulation Division - List of Personnel (THA-52 - Thai) (Last Updated May 1, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) One Stop Service & Consultation Center (OSSC) (THA-35) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Division of Innovative Health Products and Services, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Organizational Structure and Functions (THA-33 - Thai) (English-THA-33) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Payment of Project Review Fees (THA-25 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) Power of Attorney (THA-104 - Thai) (April 28, 2025)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Procedure for Using License Per Invoice through the Central Request System (NSW) (THA-86 - Thai) (April 25, 2025)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Procedures for Drug Products – Process, Duration, and Costs (THA-78 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Division of Innovative Health Products and Services, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Receiving Services at OSSC (THA-66 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Division of Innovative Health Products and Services, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Standard Operating Procedures for the Conduct of the Central Research Ethics Committee and Its Staff (THA-37 - Thai) (Version 5.1) (July 24, 2024)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Webpage) Thai Clinical Trials Registry (TCTR) (THA-31) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Medical Research Network (MedResNet), Medical Research Foundation
(Webpage) Thai FDA Skynet E-Submission System (THA-54 - Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Webpage) Types of Projects Eligible for CREC Consideration and the Scope of Cooperation of Partner Institutions (THA-24 -Thai) (Current as of August 22, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
Forms
(Form) Annual Report of Operations/Amendments for the Ethics Committee on Clinical Research Drug Studies in Humans - Jor Thor Form 3 (THA-21 - Thai) (English-THA-21 - Google Translation) (September 10, 2018)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Application Form for Medicine Importation (THA-84 - English and Thai) (February 28, 2025)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) CIOMS Form I (THA-20) (Date Unavailable)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(Form) CREC - Financial Information/Details Statement (THA-50 - Thai) (English-THA-50 - Google Translation) (Version 2.0) (January 10, 2024)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Form) Declaration of Conflict of Interest (AP 06-S04) (THA-103 – Thai and English) (English-THA-103 – Google Translate) (Version 5.1) (July 24, 2024)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Form) Documents Attached to the Notification of the Medicines Regulation Division - Details of the Requirements for Importing or Ordering Drugs into the Kingdom for Clinical Research (THA-18 - Thai) (English-THA-18 - Google Translation) (August 7, 2023)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Documents Attached to the Notification of the Medicines Regulation Division - Details of the Requirements for the Production of Modern Drug Samples for Clinical Research (THA-76 - Thai) (English-THA-76 - Google Translation) (August 7, 2023)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Health Product Adverse Event Report Form (HPVC Form-1) (THA-22 - Thai) (English-THA-22 - Official Translation) (August 1, 2024)
Health Product Vigilance Center (HPVC), Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) List of Documents (AP 08-S04) (THA-96 - Thai) (English-THA-96 – Google Translate) (Version 5.1) (February 5, 2025)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Form) List of Items Attached to N.D.W. (THA-106 - Thai) (Date Unavailable)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Patient Information Sheet Checklist (AP 09-S04) (THA-109 - Thai) (English-THA-109 – Google Translation) (Version 5.1) (July 24, 2024)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Form) Power of Attorney Form for Permission to Use the Health Product Consultation System (E-Consult) (THA-81 - Thai) (English-THA-81 - Google Translation) (Date Unavailable)
Division of Innovative Health Products and Services, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Protocol Package Checklist Form (AO 01-S04) (THA-34 - Thai) (English-THA-34 - Google Translation) (Version 5.1) (Updated October 15, 2024)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
(Form) Request for Acceptance or to Renew Acceptance for Authorization as a Research Ethics Committee to Review Clinical Research Drug Studies in Humans - Jor Thor Form EC-1 (THA-23 - Thai) (English-THA-23 - Google Translation) (September 10, 2018)
Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Request for Officers at the Import Checkpoint to Inspect Drugs Brought or Ordered into the Kingdom for Research, Analysis, Exhibition, or Charitable Donation (Form N.D.W.) (THA-105 - Thai) (English-THA-105 – Google Translate) (Date Unavailable)
Import and Export Inspection Division, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Request Form for Permission to Use the Health Product Consultation System (E-Consult) (THA-80 - Thai) (English-THA-80 - Google Translation) (Last Updated March 20, 2023)
Division of Innovative Health Products and Services, Thai Food and Drug Administration
(Form) Submission Form for Biomedical Research (AP 04-S04) (THA-102 - Thai) (English-THA-102 – Google Translation) (Version 5.1) (July 24, 2024)
Central Research Ethics Committee, National Research Council of Thailand
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 
Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Uganda
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
English
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
Yes
Clinical trial registration required
Yes
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
Yes
Age of minors
Under 18
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
In Uganda, the National Drug Authority (NDA) and the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST), in collaboration with the Uganda National Health Research Organisation (UNHRO), are involved in clinical trial oversight.

National Drug Authority

As per the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, and the G-TrialsGCP, the NDA is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial approval and inspections in Uganda. The NDA grants permission for clinical trials to be conducted in Uganda in accordance with the provisions of the NDPA-Act.

As stated in the NGHRP, the NDA regulates safety, quality, efficacy, handling, and use of drugs or drug related products and devices in research. According to UGA-29, the Clinical Trials Unit in the NDA’s Directorate of Product Safety is responsible for reviewing and approving clinical trial applications, conducting clinical trial site inspections for compliance with good clinical practices, and developing guidance documents.

Uganda National Council for Science and Technology

As delineated in the NDPA-CTReg, the NGHRP, and the G-CTConduct, in addition to obtaining the NDA’s permission to conduct research in Uganda, an applicant must obtain approval in the form of a research permit from the UNCST, or from an institution authorized by the UNCST.

As per UGA-30, the UNCST was established by the UNCST-Act as a semi-autonomous government agency under the Ministry of Science, Technology, and Innovation. The mandate of the UNCST is to develop and implement policies and strategies for integrating science and technology into national development policies; to advise the government of Uganda on policy matters necessary for promoting science and technology; and coordinate and guide national research and development in Uganda.

As per the NGHRP, the UNCST registers and, in liaison with the Research Secretariat in the Office of the President of Uganda, clears all research intended to be carried out in the country.

The G-CTConduct and the G-UNCSTreg also state that applicants must register their research proposals, obtain approval, and be issued a research permit from the UNCST prior to initiating a study.

Uganda National Health Research Organisation

The UNHRO-Act authorizes the UNHRO to register and renew research protocols, and to implement and enforce an ethical code of conduct for health research in Uganda. The UNHRO, in collaboration with the UNCST, conducts a scientific and ethical review of all health research protocols for approval. According to the NGHRP, the UNHRO also collaborates with the UNCST to register all health research protocols centrally at the UNCST. No additional information regarding UNHRO’s role is available.

Other Considerations

Please note: Uganda is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (UGA-3), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see UGA-21.

Contact Information

National Drug Authority

According to UGA-23 and UGA-10, the NDA’s contact information is as follows:

National Drug Authority
Head Office
Plot 93, Buganda Road, after St. Catherine Hospital
P.O. Box 23096
Kampala, Uganda

Reception Phone: +256 [0]417 788 100
Directorate of Product Safety Phone: +256 [0]417 788 124
Directorate of Inspectorate Services Phone: +256 [0]417 788 129
WhatsApp: +256 74002080
Innovation & Research Desk: [0]800 101 999 (Toll Free Line), 0791 415555 (WhatsApp)
Email: ndaug@nda.or.ug

Uganda National Council for Science and Technology

As per the G-UNCSTreg and UGA-25, the UNCST’s contact information is as follows:

Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
Plot 6, Kimera Road, Ntinda
P.O. Box 6884
Kampala, Uganda
Phone: +256 414 705500
Fax: +256 414 234579
Email: info@uncst.go.ug

Uganda National Health Research Organisation

Per UGA-42, the UNHRO’s contact information is as follows:

Uganda National Health Research Organisation
Plot 2, Berkeley Lane, Entebbe
P.O. Box 465
Entebbe, Uganda

Tel/Fax: +256 414 321766
Email: unhrodesk4@gmail.com

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, and the G-TrialsGCP, the National Drug Authority (NDA) is responsible for reviewing, evaluating, and approving clinical trial applications for registered or unregistered medicines in Uganda. The scope of the NDA’s assessment includes all clinical trials (Phases I-IV).

Per the NDPA-CTReg, the NDA’s review and approval of a clinical trial application are dependent upon the applicant submitting proof in the application of institutional level ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda) approval and a research permit from the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST). However, the G-TrialsGCP indicates that parallel submissions may be made to the NDA and the UNCST. In that instance, the NDA would not make a final decision until after the trial receives ethical clearance. NDA approval will be dependent on receipt of the protocol’s approval by the institutional EC in consultations with the UNCST.

Clinical Trial Review Process

National Drug Authority

The NDPA-CTReg, the G-TrialsGCP, and the G-CTConduct indicate that upon receipt of a clinical trial application, the NDA initially screens the application for completeness. If the NDA is not satisfied with the information provided, the applicant will be advised in writing to provide further information or clarification. According to the G-CTConduct, the applicant must submit their responses in writing or in any other format as advised by the NDA, and in the timeframe determined by the NDA. NDA reviews are performed following a first-in first-out principle, except for clinical trials that are to be conducted in public health emergencies such as disease outbreaks, which may be exempted.

The NDPA-CTReg indicates that in considering an application for a clinical trial, the NDA must take into account the following:

Relevance of the clinical trial
Suitability of the principal investigator (PI)
Quality of the facilities to be used for the clinical trial
Adequacy and completeness of the information and procedures to obtain consent of the clinical trial participants
Provision for indemnity for the PI and insurance for the clinical trial participants
Terms of the agreement between the sponsor and the PI
Per the G-CTConduct, complete applications are given a Clinical Trial Application code. Applications verified as complete will undergo one (1) of three (3) types of reviews:

Internal review, which is further subdivided into expedited or routine review
Expert review, which involves external reviewers co-opted by the NDA following internal procedures
Joint reviews, which are carried out jointly with other regulatory bodies including the UNCST, Uganda National Health Research Organisation (UNHRO), and the primary EC. These reviews will be coordinated by the UNCST
As stated in the G-CTConduct and the NDPA-CTReg, fast track review/authorization of an application is applicable for the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Clinical trial applications for investigational drugs to provide treatment where no therapy exists (decision will be given to the applicant within 30 working days)
Clinical trials conducted in an emergency, such as during a disease outbreak (eligible for fast track review with a timeline of 15 working days)
Clinical trial applications that do not explicitly meet either above criterion, but are led by the Ministry of Health in the interest of a public health intervention
Any other circumstance that the NDA may determine
According to the G-CTConduct, the NDA may decide to a) authorize the clinical trial and issue a clinical trial certificate; b) request additional information to support the application; or c) reject the clinical trial application, providing reasoning. The NDA’s decision is communicated to the applicant in writing. The clinical trial certificate is valid for one (1) year from the date it is awarded. Per the NDPA-CTReg, the NDA may also issue a clinical trial certificate with conditions. See Appendix XI of the G-CTConduct for the NDA clinical trial process flowchart and Form 34 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg for the format of the clinical trial certificate.

See the Submission Content section for detailed information on the contents of the clinical trial application.

The G-CTConduct states that any new information that becomes available regarding the product, such as new adverse effects or changes in formulation or the manufacturer, must be submitted to the NDA as soon as possible. Unless otherwise stated, additional information that is submitted prior to issuance of a clinical trial certificate will be considered as part of the submission and reviewed accordingly. The NDA may request supplementary information or documentation when appropriate, which should be submitted within the stated timeline, usually four (4) weeks. The NDA secretariat may grant additional time to provide information upon request by the applicant on a case-by-case basis. If the requested information is not submitted, the application will be archived within 50 working days. The application will need to be resubmitted for review.

Per the G-CTConduct, annual renewal of authorization to conduct the clinical trial is required for the trial prior to expiration of the validity. For studies that have completed follow-up for the last participant where there is no product or human participant, oversight will be deferred to the primary EC and the UNCST.

The NDPA-CTReg and the G-CTConduct indicate that the NDA may, on its own initiative, make amendments to the conditions for conducting a clinical trial where it is necessary for the safety or scientific validity of the clinical trial. The NDA will give 15 days’ notice of the intended amendment to the sponsor and the PI with reasons for the amendment and request a written response to the proposed amendments prior to effecting the amendments. As stated in the NDPA-CTReg, the NDA will, in making amendments to the conditions of conducting a clinical trial, take into consideration the response of the sponsor or PI.

The NDPA-CTReg indicates that a sponsor who intends to amend any condition of the clinical trial specified in the clinical trial certificate, or who intends to add investigators, add clinical trial sites, or change investigators, must make an application to the NDA for authorization of the amendment. The amendment applications will be considered using the procedure and requirements for an application for authorization to conduct a clinical trial.

The G-CTConduct specifies that the application to amend the conditions of a clinical trial will be screened for completeness and will essentially be complete in the first instance if it includes all the required documents, appendices, and finished checklist. Applications which are incomplete will not be evaluated, and a letter documenting the deficiencies in the application will be issued to the applicant. The NDA may request supplementary data or documentation where applicable. The NDA will consider the favorable opinion of the EC(s), the UNCST, and other relevant information, and may request that the applicant to submit an interim clinical trial study report to support the decision. Additionally, the NDA may take other regulatory action such as an inspection of the clinical trial site or investigational product (IP) manufacturing facility for regulatory and protocol compliance prior to making a decision. The NDA may approve or reject the application and specify the reasons for rejection. The decision will be communicated to the applicant in writing. Changes made to the informed consent forms will be acknowledged electronically unless they are directly related to the safety of the IP. Additionally, the NDA must be notified within 90 days about delays in trial initiation once a clinical trial has been approved and a clinical trial certificate issued.

See the G-CTConduct for detailed NDA amendment review procedures and Appendix IV of the G-CTConduct for the Categorization of Amendments.

As per the G-CTConduct, the NDA may at any reasonable time conduct inspections of the trial site prior to or after issuance of a clinical trial certificate. The purpose of the inspections is to assess the staff and facilities to be used or that are being used for the conduct of the clinical trial, and to verify the availability of the necessary resources and feasibility of conducting the study at the proposed site(s). These inspections will assess the compliance of the trial conduct with the conditions of the certificate. The NDA secretariat may contact the PI or sponsor notifying them of the date(s) of inspection. The secretariat will conduct inspections routinely, or as a result of a trigger. In addition, the inspections may be done jointly with the UNCST and/or the EC.

As indicated in the G-TrialsGCP, an inspection by the NDA may involve a comparison of the practices and procedures of the clinical trial with the commitments made in the application to conduct the trial; a comparison of the data submitted to the sponsor and the NDA with the source data; and a system inspection of the sponsor, clinical laboratory, or contract research organization generating data for submission to regulatory authorities. For more information on NDA inspections, see the G-TrialsGCP.

The NDPA-CTReg states that the NDA may, by notice, suspend or terminate a clinical trial where the conditions of a clinical trial certificate are not complied with or the NDA has information regarding the safety or scientific validity of the clinical trial or the conduct of the clinical trial. The NDA notice, which must be delivered to the sponsor or PI, will apply to the clinical trial generally or to one (1) or more of the clinical trial sites. Where a notice is for the suspension of the clinical trial, the suspension must be for the period specified in the notice. The notice must indicate, where applicable, the conditions to be fulfilled before the clinical trial or, as applicable, the conduct of the clinical trial at a particular site, may resume. Before issuing a notice, the NDA must inform the sponsor or PI of the notice and the reasons for the notice, and then advise the sponsor or PI to make a written representation on the intended suspension or termination within five (5) days. The NDA must consider the written representation and inform the sponsor or PI of its decision within seven (7) working days. However, the NDA is not required to inform the sponsor or PI of the notice if it appears that there is an imminent risk to the health or safety of any person participating in or involved in a clinical trial.

Uganda National Council for Science and Technology

According to the NDPA-CTReg, the NGHRP, and the G-CTConduct, an applicant must also submit a research proposal for review and approval to the UNCST. Per the G-UNCSTreg, the UNCST receives and reviews research protocols for their scientific merit, safety, and ethical appropriateness, and when satisfied, issues permits to conduct the research in Uganda. The research permit is granted at a national level to facilitate access to research resources within the country. The G-UNCSTreg states that as a part of its review, the UNCST liaises with the Research Secretariat in the Office of the President of Uganda to obtain security verification and clearance for the investigator. The investigator must pay a Research Administration and Clearance fee for the entire period of the research project, but such a period must not exceed five (5) years. Investigators interested in continuing a study using an approved protocol beyond the UNCST research permit expiration date should make a written request for an extension or renewal of the permit to the UNCST Executive Secretary. The request should be accompanied by a progress report, the EC approval, and any other institutional approvals, where applicable. See the G-UNCSTreg for detailed extension/renewal request submission information.

The G-UNCSTreg indicates that any changes, amendments, and addenda to the research protocol, research instruments, or the consent form must be submitted to the designated local EC or the lead agency (NDA) for review and approval prior to implementing the changes. The UNCST should be notified of the EC- or lead agency-approved changes within 10 working days.

The UNCST also reserves the right to revoke, suspend, or terminate a research permit, and, if necessary, without giving notice to the investigator, in the event of gross misconduct or violation of the G-UNCSTreg guidelines.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 25, 2025
National Drug Authority

In accordance with the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, and the NDPA-FeesReg, applicants are responsible for paying certain non-refundable fees to the National Drug Authority (NDA) related to clinical trial applications. As set forth in the NDPA-FeesReg, the following fees apply for clinical trials involving human drugs and vaccines (except herbal drugs):

Application to conduct a clinical trial for a registered drug – $5,000 USD
Application to conduct a clinical trial for an unregistered drug – $8,000 USD
Application to conduct an adaptive clinical trial – $10,000 USD
Application to conduct a clinical trial for locally manufactured drugs – 10,000,000 Ugandan shillings
Application for major amendment of clinical trial protocol – $700 USD
Application for minor amendment of clinical trial protocol – $300 USD
Notification of amendment to clinical trial protocol – $50 USD
Application for major amendment of protocol for an adaptive clinical trial – $2,000 USD
Annual renewal of clinical trial certificate – $500 USD
Extension of period for a clinical trial – $1,000 USD
Fast tracking applications – 200% of applicable fees
See the NDPA-FeesReg for NDA fees regarding the inspection of local and foreign manufacturing plants for good manufacturing practice (GMP). Additionally, see the NDPA-FeesReg and the NDPA-AmendFeesReg for drug importation fees.

Payment Instructions

The NDPA-FeesReg notes that the prescribed fee is payable at the same time that an application is made to the NDA. The NDA will not accept an application with respect to which the prescribed fee is not paid.

According to the G-CTConduct, the application fee payment details are as follows:

National Drug Authority: TIN 1000054563
Bank: Stanbic Bank Uganda
Account numbers: 9030008068851 (US Dollars) and 9030005759829 (Ugandan shillings)
Swift code: SBICUGKXXXX
Sort Code: 040147
Acceptable forms of payment: cash in the bank, real time gross settlement (RTGS), electronic funds transfer (EFT), telegraphic transfer (TT), or check

Uganda National Council for Science and Technology

As delineated in the G-UNCSTreg, the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST) charges a non-refundable Research Administration and Clearance fee of $300 USD, or its equivalent in Ugandan shillings, to register a research proposal. The UNCST will not register the protocol or issue a research permit until this fee has been paid. Permits are valid for the entire duration specified for a project. However, the fee covers a research period not to exceed five (5) years. Projects that extend beyond the initial five (5) year period are required to pay $300 USD for the extension. All applicants, excluding East African students, are responsible for paying this fee. East African students are only required to pay a fee of $50 USD. However, UGA-20 further indicates that this excludes those pursuing post doctorate studies.

Payment Instructions

The G-UNCSTreg delineates that applicants should make their payments to the UNCST bank accounts and are encouraged to make cash payments to avoid additional bank fees. An official receipt is issued once the UNCST receives a stamped copy of the bank deposit. See Section 6.0 of the G-UNCSTreg for detailed payment information.

According to UGA-20, the payment information is as follows:

Bank: Any Standard Chartered Bank
Account title: Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST)
Account numbers: 8705611811400 (US Dollars) and 0105610632101 (Ugandan shillings)
Swift code: SCBLUGKA

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Overview

As per the G-UNCSTreg and the NGHRP, research involving human participants must be reviewed and approved by an institutional ethics committee (EC) (referred to as a research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda), which must be accredited by the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST).

Ethics Committee Composition

The NGHRP states that an EC must have at least five (5) members who collectively encompass the qualifications and experience required to review and evaluate the scientific, medical, and ethical aspects of a proposed clinical trial. Specifically, the composition should include:

Individuals of varying backgrounds, including consideration of gender, cultural backgrounds, and sensitivity to social issues in the community from which research participants are drawn
At least one (1) individual whose primary concern is scientific, and at least one (1) whose primary concern is non-scientific
At least one (1) individual who is unaffiliated with the institution
At least one (1) lay person from the community, whose primary background is not in scientific research involving human participants, and who is capable of sharing insights about the community from which participants are likely to be drawn
Additional criteria for EC membership are available in Sections 4.3 and 4.4 of the NGHRP.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

According to the NGHRP, each EC member must take at least one (1) course in human research protection within one (1) year of appointment to an EC, and thereafter, should undergo continued research ethics education at least once every two (2) years. Membership terms in any EC have a maximum three (3) year duration, after which a member is eligible for reappointment. A person may not serve as a member in more than two (2) ECs concurrently.

As set forth in the NGHRP, each EC must have written procedures, including a process to be followed for conducting reviews. The following minimum requirements must be met:

Meet at least once every three (3) months
At least 50% of members, including one (1) member representing community interests, must be present to conduct reviews
Project approval requires a simple majority of those members present at the meeting
Respond to any allegations of ethical violations in approved or rejected research projects
Liaise with other ECs within and outside the country to better carry out its functions
Submit annual performance reports to the UNCST
The NGHRP further indicates that no EC member may participate in the EC’s initial or continuing review of any project in which the member has a conflict of interest, except to provide information as may be requested by the EC. An EC may also, at its discretion, invite individuals with competence in special areas to assist in the review of protocols which require expertise beyond, or in addition to, that available in the EC. These individuals do not vote at EC meetings. See Sections 4.5.1 and 4.9 of the NGHRP for additional EC review requirements.

As per the NGHRP, an EC must also prepare and maintain the following:

Detailed written procedures
Copies of reviewed proposals and corresponding documentation (e.g., scientific evaluations, progress reports, correspondence with investigators)
Meeting minutes
Records of continuing review activities
Documents relating to research projects must be retained for at least five (5) years after the research project has been completed. All documents must be accessible for inspection and use by authorized UNCST representatives. See Section 4.6 of the NGHRP for additional EC recordkeeping requirements.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the NGHRP, the central scope assessed by institutional ethics committees (ECs) (research ethics committees (RECs) in Uganda) relates to safeguarding the rights, safety, and well-being of all trial participants. An EC’s primary functions include:

Maintaining ethical standards of practice in research
Protecting participants and investigators from harm or exploitation
Preserving the participants’ rights and welfare
Providing assurance to society of the protection of participants’ rights and well-being
Ensuring adherence to an ethical conduct of research protocol
An EC must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses, and Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations).

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

Per the NDPA-CTReg, proof of institutional EC approval must be submitted in a clinical trial application to the National Drug Authority (NDA). However, the G-TrialsGCP indicates that parallel submissions may be made to the NDA and the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST). In that instance, the NDA would not make a final decision until after the trial receives ethical clearance. NDA approval will be dependent on receipt of the protocol’s approval by the institutional EC in consultations with the UNCST.

As stated in the NGHRP, the EC will notify investigators in writing about the outcome of its review. If the EC does not approve a research activity, it will include reasons for its disapproval in the written notification.

As per the NGHRP, ECs may use an expedited review process for research involving no more than minimal risk or for minor changes in previously approved research protocols during a period of one (1) year or less from which approval was given. Minor changes include an addition of a collaborator, a small change in the number of research participants, or spelling corrections. Expedited review processes may also be applied to annual renewal of studies, in which the only outstanding activity is data analysis and report writing. Major changes include, but are not limited to, significant changes in the research methodology or a change in procedures for research participants. Each EC must develop standard operating procedures to define eligibility for expedited review. See the NGHRP for more details on expedited review procedures.

According to the NGHRP, if a multicenter or collaborative trial is being conducted and the same clinical protocol is being used for all the sites, the participating institutions may enter into a joint EC review arrangement. The joint EC review must comply with the requisite ethical standards outlined in the NGHRP.

The NGHRP indicates that ECs must conduct continuing/periodic review of approved trials to ensure compliance with scientific and ethical requirements in accordance with the NGHRP. The EC must conduct the continuing review at intervals appropriate to the degree of risk, but not less than once a year, and have a plan for onsite monitoring of approved studies.

The NGHRP further delineates that changes/amendments in the research protocol cannot be implemented without prior approval from the EC, except when necessary to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard or danger to research participants. Per the NDPA-CTReg, evidence of ethical approval of the amendment to the protocol is a required element of an application to the NDA for amendment of conditions of a clinical trial.

Additionally, the NGHRP states that ECs have the authority to halt, suspend, or terminate approval of research that is not being conducted in accordance with the EC’s requirements, has been associated with unexpected serious harm to research participants, or contravenes the NGHRP. If an EC suspends or terminates its approval, it must provide a written statement for its reasons for doing so, and immediately communicate this decision to the investigator, as well as to the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST).

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
No applicable requirements.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Overview

The Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST) is the central statutory body responsible for the registration and accreditation of institutional ethics committees (ECs) (research ethics committees (RECs) in Uganda). The UNCST’s NGHRP establishes a national framework for research involving humans to ensure that the rights, interests, values, and welfare of research participants are not compromised.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

As per the NGHRP, the UNCST’s Accreditation Committee for RECs in Uganda (ACREC) must accredit all ECs. An organization that wishes to establish an EC must apply for accreditation of the EC at the UNCST, with assurance that the organization will comply with the requirements set forth in the NGHRP. The assurance must at the minimum include:

A statement of principles for protecting the rights and welfare of human research participants of research conducted at or sponsored by the organization. This may include an appropriate existing code, declaration, or statement of ethical principles, or a statement formulated by the organization itself
Assurance of availability of staff; office and meeting space for the EC; and sufficient resources to support the EC’s operations
A list of EC members appointed by the head of the organization or the head’s designee. The members should be identified by name, qualifications, profession, specialty, organization of affiliation, and representative capacity in the EC
Written standard operating procedures for the EC
The NGHRP indicates that the ACREC will review the organization’s application, and if satisfied, will accredit the EC. An EC is not permitted to commence its activities until ACREC authorization is received.

Per UGA-33, the National Research Information Management System (NRIMS) (UGA-33) supports users in applying for accreditation as an institutional EC. See UGA-9 for the accreditation application form and the NGHRP for details on EC establishment requirements. A list of UNCST-accredited ECs is also available at UGA-37.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Overview

According to the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, the NGHRP, the G-UNCSTreg, and the G-TrialsGCP, institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda) approval, National Drug Authority (NDA) approval, and Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST) registration are mandatory before a study may commence.

Per the NDPA-CTReg, the NDA’s review and approval of a clinical trial application are dependent upon the applicant submitting proof in the application of institutional EC approval and a research permit from the UNCST. However, the G-TrialsGCP indicates that parallel submissions may be made to the NDA and the UNCST. In that instance, the NDA would not make a final decision until after the trial receives ethical clearance. NDA approval will be dependent on receipt of the protocol’s approval by the institutional EC in consultations with the UNCST.

Regulatory Submission

National Drug Authority

According to the NDPA-CTReg, an application to the NDA for authorization to conduct a clinical trial is submitted by a sponsor, who must be one (1) of the following:

The drug patent holder
A licensed person
The drug manufacturer
An agent of the drug patent holder or the drug manufacturer
The NDPA-CTReg states that where an agent submits the clinical trial application, the agent must also submit a power of attorney verifying their appointment as an agent or a letter of authorization (See Form 30 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg or UGA-18). Where an application for authorization to conduct a clinical trial is for a drug under patent, the principal investigator (PI) must submit a letter of authorization from the manufacturer of the drug. Furthermore, the G-CTConduct indicates that based on the clinical trial agreement between the sponsor and the PI, the NDA will liaise with the in-country PI representing the sponsor regarding the application.

As per the G-CTConduct, the sponsor or authorized person should submit one (1) copy of the completed clinical trial application form for each application. The application must be bound in a single volume (or series of volumes), and the pages numbered sequentially. Appended documents should be bound together with the application, with tabbed sections clearly identifying each appended document. The text and diagrams must be clear and legible in 12 pt Times New Roman font. Incomplete submissions will not be received at the NDA registry. See Form 29 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg, Appendix I of the G-CTConduct, or UGA-39 for the clinical trial application form.

According to the G-CTConduct, the application package should be submitted physically to the NDA or electronically. Electronic submissions should be sent by email to clinicaltrials@nda.or.ug or through the NDA’s integrated Regulatory Information Management System (iRIMS) (UGA-40). Physical applications must be submitted to:

The Secretary to the Authority
National Drug Authority
NDA Tower
Plot 93, Buganda Road
P.O. Box 23096
Kampala, Uganda
Phone: +256-417788100; Toll Free: 0800101999

As per the G-CTConduct, all applications and supporting data submitted to the NDA should be presented in English. Supporting documents that are not in English must be accompanied by an authenticated English translation.

The NDPA-CTReg and G-CTConduct further indicate that an application to amend the conditions of a clinical trial must use Form 35, in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg and Appendix III of the G-CTConduct. The G-CTConduct also notes that that the form is on the NDA website (see UGA-19). Per the G-CTConduct, the proposed changes must be listed in a cover letter signed by the applicant. In the cover letter, a clear step-by-step justification for each proposed change(s) must be provided, and the possible consequences with regard to the benefit/risk balance for participants already enrolled in the trial must be summarized. The subject of the cover letter must be “Application to amend CTA XXX” where XXX is the Clinical Trial Application code assigned by the NDA upon authorization of the clinical trial and indicated on the clinical trial certificate. Only one (1) copy of the completed form must be sent to the NDA. As stated in the NDPA-CTReg, an application for additional investigators, additional clinical trial sites, or change of the investigators must use Form 36 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg or UGA-13. The application forms must, where applicable, be accompanied by evidence of ethics approval of the amendment to the clinical trial protocol and the prescribed fees. Applicants may apply for renewal of a clinical trial approval using the form found in Appendix VIII of the G-CTConduct or on the NDA website at UGA-32. See Appendix VI of the G-CTConduct for the Checklist for Application for Authorization of Renewal of Conduct of a Clinical Trial, and UGA-2 for a related clinical trial application screening renewal form.

Uganda National Council for Science and Technology

Per the G-UNCSTreg, research protocols submitted to the UNCST for registration and approval must be well written and fully developed. Draft research protocols will not be accepted for registration. In order to register a research protocol, the PI should complete the necessary research application forms. Where a research protocol requires ethical approval by a foreign-based EC, it is advisable that such approval be obtained prior to submitting the protocol to the UNCST.

Applications for UNCST permission to conduct research in Uganda should be made through the National Research Information Management System (NRIMS) (UGA-33).

UGA-20 also provides the following contact information for further information on the UNCST research clearance process:

Beth Mutumba
Phone: 0414 557 025/0755 423 321
Email: b.mutumba@uncst.go.ug

Samuel Barasa
Phone: 0414 557 021/0779 452 441
Email: s.barasa@uncst.go.ug

Ethics Review Submission

UGA-20 indicates that for EC submissions, the applicant should contact the accredited committee at their institution of affiliation or obtain contacts via the UNCST website. After identifying the appropriate EC, the applicant must create an account and fill out the application on NRIMS (UGA-33).

Per UGA-33, NRIMS is an integrated online platform for accessing digital services provided by the UNCST. The platform supports users in applying for institutional EC permits and applying for UNCST approval to conduct research in Uganda. See UGA-33 for more information.

Each EC has its own required submission procedures, which can differ regarding the application format and number of copies.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

National Drug Authority

As per the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, UGA-39, and UGA-1, the following documentation must be submitted to the National Drug Authority (NDA) in a clinical trial application (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Proof of payment of the prescribed fees
Applications for import and/or export of biological materials (if required)
Application Form for Clinical Trial (See Form 29 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg, Appendix I of the G-CTConduct, or UGA-39)
Trial protocol (See Schedule 2 of the NDPA-CTReg)
Investigator’s Brochure (See UGA-4 or Schedule 2 of the NDPA-CTReg)
If the investigational product (IP) is unregistered, a dossier following the Format for Investigational Medicinal Product Dossier (See Schedule 2 of the NDPA-CTReg)
Phytochemical analysis report and microbiological contamination report, where the clinical trial is for an herbal medicinal product
Participant Information Leaflet and informed consent form, which must be approved by the ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda)
Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) of the IP or other evidence of manufacturing quality, safety, and consistency
Package insert(s)/product information leaflet for the comparator and concomitant medications
Certificate of GMP of the placebo, if appropriate
Evidence of accreditation of the designated laboratories or other evidence of Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) and assay validation
Insurance certificate specific for the trial sourced from a local provider or in consultation with the NDA (valid evidence of insurance for the participants by a local insurance company and of professional indemnity for the principal investigator (PI))
Signed and completed declarations by all investigators (See UGA-16 or Form 31 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg)
Approval of ECs for the protocol
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST) approval
Full, legible copies of key, peer-reviewed published articles supporting the application
Sample of the label for the IP
Letter of authorization from the manufacturer/product owner (See UGA-18 or Form 30 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg)
Pharmaceutical data on dosage form (See UGA-14)
Duly signed declaration of the monitor (See UGA-17 or Form 32 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg)
Clinical trial agreement between the sponsor and the PI
Duly signed declaration by the sponsor and PI of funds of the clinical trial (See UGA-15 or Form 33 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg)
Other supporting documents and any other requirement as may be determined by the NDA
See Appendix II of the G-CTConduct and UGA-1 for the clinical trial application checklist.

The C-InstitutionCert further indicates that clinical trial certificates will not be issued without submission of a valid certificate of suitability of the premises supplying drugs within the respective institutions.

Applicants may apply for renewal of a clinical trial approval using the form found in Appendix VIII of the G-CTConduct or on the NDA website at UGA-32. See Appendix VI of the G-CTConduct for the Checklist for Application for Authorization of Renewal of Conduct of a Clinical Trial, and UGA-2 for a related clinical trial application screening renewal form.

As per the NDPA-CTReg, an application to amend the conditions of a clinical trial must use Form 35, and an application for additional investigators, additional clinical trial sites, or for change of the investigators must use Form 36 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg or UGA-13.

According to the G-CTConduct, an application for amendment of the conditions of a clinical trial can also be found in Appendix III of the G-CTConduct and on the NDA website at UGA-19. The amendment application must be accompanied by a cover letter signed by the applicant together with required supporting documentation, including a submission of the protocol amendment in tracked changes, a clean copy clearly indicating the protocol version number, valid evidence of payment of amendment fees, and ethical approval of the proposed amendment. See the NDPA-CTReg, G-CTConduct, and UGA-19 for more detailed amendment application content requirements. See Appendix V of the G-CTConduct or UGA-22 for the amendments screening form.

Uganda National Council for Science and Technology

As per UGA-20, the PI should have soft copies of the following documents ready before making an online submission through the National Research Information Management System (NRIMS) (UGA-33) to the UNCST:

A letter of introduction or recommendation from the affiliated institution in Uganda (for foreign investigators only). The letter should mention the names of the foreign investigators and it should be addressed to the UNCST Executive Secretary
An administrative clearance letter from the head of the institution where the research is going to be conducted, addressed to the PI and/or the UNCST Executive Secretary
Admission letter for academic research (applies to only East African students)
Curriculum vitaes (CVs) for each investigator, dated and signed or initialed on each page
Proof of payment of research administration and clearance fees for the study
Additionally, a permit must be obtained from the UNCST to export and import plant or animal specimens for further investigations.

See UGA-20 for detailed application requirements.

Ethics Committee Requirements

According to UGA-20, EC approval is obtained through NRIMS (UGA-33).

The NGHRP further indicates that all ECs must develop detailed standard operating procedures for submission of protocols and other requirements. However, at a minimum, the requirements should include:

Research protocol with version and date
Informed consent documents
Study instruments such as questionnaires, case report forms, videos, flip charts, and any other data collection tools or forms
Samples of trial drugs
Evidence that the investigator(s) is appropriately qualified, experienced and, where applicable, licensed, and has adequate facilities for the safe and efficient conduct of research
A plan for disseminating research findings to the community in which the research was carried out, and other authorized agencies in Uganda
Clinical Protocol

As delineated in Schedule 2 of the NDPA-CTReg and UGA-12, the clinical protocol should contain the following information (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

General information (trial identification; contact information of sponsor, monitor, sponsor’s medical expert, and qualified physician; name and title of investigator(s); name(s) and address(es) of clinical trial laboratory(ies) and other medical and/or technical department(s)/institutions involved in the trial; etc.)
Background information (product name, dosage form, description of population to be studied, etc.)
Trial objectives and purpose
Trial design
Selection and withdrawal of participants
Treatment profile
Trial parameters
Assessment of efficacy
Assessment of safety
Operational aspects
Adverse event reporting methods
Evaluation of results, including statistics
Direct access to source data/documents
Quality control and quality assurance
Description of ethical considerations relating to the trial
Data handling and recordkeeping
Financing and insurance, if not addressed in a separate agreement
Publication policy, if not addressed in a separate agreement
Supplements/appendices
For detailed information on these elements, please refer to the NDPA-CTReg and UGA-12.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Overview

Per the NDPA-CTReg, the National Drug Authority (NDA)’s review and approval of a clinical trial application are dependent upon the applicant submitting proof in the application of institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda) approval and a research permit from the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST). However, the G-TrialsGCP indicates that parallel submissions may be made to the NDA and the UNCST. In that instance, the NDA would not make a final decision until after the trial receives ethical clearance. NDA approval will be dependent on receipt of the protocol’s approval by the institutional EC in consultations with the UNCST.

Regulatory Authority Approval

National Drug Authority

Per the G-CTConduct, NDA reviews for clinical trials are performed following a first-in first-out principle, except for clinical trials conducted in public health emergencies such as disease outbreaks, which may be exempted.

According to UGA-24, the NDA will screen and acknowledge receipt of a clinical trial application within 10 working days and reach a decision on the application within 50 working days. The G-CTConduct further specifies that the total processing time for a new clinical trial application routine review is 60 working days. Fast track reviews, under which a regulatory decision is given to the applicant within 15 or 30 working days, are applicable for certain clinical trial applications. See the Scope of Assessment section for more information.

The G-CTConduct states that the NDA may request supplementary information or documentation when appropriate, which should be submitted within the stated timeline, usually four (4) weeks. The NDA secretariat may grant additional time to provide information upon request by the applicant on a case-by-case basis. If the requested information is not submitted, the application will be archived within 50 working days. The application will need to be resubmitted for review. If the NDA, on its own initiative, makes amendments to the conditions for conducting a clinical trial for safety reasons or the scientific validity of the clinical trial, the NDA will give 15 calendar days’ notice to the sponsor or the principal investigator (PI) and request submittal of a written response to the proposed amendments.

Additionally, according to UGA-24, the NDA conducts annual reviews of ongoing trials within 20 working days and reviews amendments of clinical trial authorization within 20 working days. Per the G-CTConduct, the NDA review timelines published on UGA-24 do not include the time taken by the applicant to respond to any NDA requests for additional information. A stop-clock mechanism is applied each time the NDA requests additional information.

See Appendices X and XI of the G-CTConduct for the Service Delivery Timelines for Submitted Documents by the Authority and for the Clinical Trial Process Flow, respectively.

Uganda National Council for Science and Technology

The G-UNCSTreg states that the UNCST provides feedback on the registration status of a protocol within 10 working days from the submission date. According to the NGHRP, the UNCST registration process is normally completed within 14 working days.

Ethics Committee Approval

Per the G-TrialsGCP, an applicant must also submit the clinical trial protocol for review and approval by a UNCST-accredited institutional EC. As indicated in the NGHRP, the EC is required to review a clinical protocol within 60 days from the date of its receipt. In the case of an annual continuing review, the EC should maintain the same anniversary date of approval for any given protocol. Review outcomes must be communicated to the applicant within 14 days of the EC’s review.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Overview

According to the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, the NGHRP, the G-UNCSTreg, and the G-TrialsGCP, institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda) approval, National Drug Authority (NDA) approval, and Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST) registration are mandatory before a study may commence.

As per the NGHRP and the UNHRO-Act, the UNCST also works in collaboration with the Uganda National Health Research Organisation (UNHRO) to register all health research protocols. However, the registration is conducted centrally at the UNCST.

The G-CTConduct and the NDPA-CTReg indicate that following the NDA’s approval of the clinical trial application, the applicant is also required to obtain a permit from the NDA to import investigational products (IPs) approved for the clinical trial. See the Manufacturing & Import section for more information on IP import permit requirements.

As stated in the G-TrialsGCP, research intended to be carried out at the community level (e.g. vaccine trials) should ideally ensure adequate consultation with civil society organizations that may exist within affected communities at all phases of the trial. Sponsors are encouraged to establish Community Advisory Groups/Community Advisory Boards (CAGs/CABs), which act as liaisons between the investigator and the community. Additionally, per the NGCER, community engagement is an opportunity for communities to participate in the design and conduct of research, and enhances the relevance, ownership, and applicability of research findings. See the G-TrialsGCP for more information on CAGs/CABs, and see the NGCER for UNCST guidance on how to ensure community engagement as a way to improve responsiveness to community needs and accountability in research.

Clinical Trial Agreement

As delineated in the NDPA-CTReg and the G-CTConduct, before the trial begins, the sponsor must sign a clinical trial agreement with the principal investigator (PI).

According to the G-TrialsGCP, if the sponsor decides to use a contract research organization (CRO) to conduct the trial, the transferred duties should be specified in writing and evidence of a mutual agreement must be provided. The sponsor is responsible for securing agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. A signed agreement between involved parties (such as the PI/institution and sponsor; the PI/institution and CRO; and the sponsor and CRO), is considered an essential document before a clinical trial can commence.

Per the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor should obtain the investigator's agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with the G-TrialsGCP, the principles of good clinical practice (GCP), the requirements of the NDA, and the protocol agreed upon by the sponsor and given approval by the relevant EC
Comply with procedures for data recording/reporting
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain the trial-related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution that these documents are no longer needed
According to the NGHRP, collaborating research partners must agree on appropriate data access and use rights before commencement of the study.

Clinical Trial Registration

The G-CTConduct states that clinical trial registration with a publicly accessible clinical trial registry is a requirement for all industry-funded trials in Uganda. Details of registration should be provided with the clinical trial application. It also states that clinical trials conducted in Uganda must be registered with the Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (UGA-35) and any other publicly accessible clinical trials registry recognized by the World Health Organization (WHO). The respective number should be submitted upon application. Additionally, the NDA maintains a clinical trials register (see UGA-36) that details all clinical trials that have received a regulatory decision. This includes information on clinical trial applications that are authorized, suspended, rejected, terminated, and completed.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

In accordance with the NDPA-CTReg, the NDPA-PVReg, the NDPA-PVRegAmdt, the G-CTConduct, the NGHRP, and the G-TrialsGCP, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Uganda’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any untoward medical occurrence in a research participant who is administered an investigational product (IP), and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – All noxious and unintended responses to a medicinal product related to any dose
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death, is life-threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction – An adverse reaction, the nature or severity of which is not consistent with the applicable product information (e.g., Investigator's Brochure for an unapproved IP)
Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

As per the NDPA-CTReg and the G-TrialsGCP, the principal investigator (PI) must report all SAEs to the sponsor within 48 hours of first knowledge. The report must identify each participant by an assigned number. When the SAE results in a participant’s death, the PI must supply the sponsor, the National Drug Authority (NDA), and the institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda) with any additional information requested.

The NGHRP states that the PI is required to report to the EC no later than seven (7) calendar days upon receiving notice of an SAE. A detailed report of the SAE should be submitted within seven (7) calendar days from the date it is reported to the EC. All other AEs should be reported by the PI to the EC as soon as possible, but no later than 14 calendar days. As set forth in the NDPA-CTReg, the PI must record and report to the sponsor any suspected unexpected serious adverse reaction (SUSAR) that occurs during the course of the trial.

Sponsor Responsibilities

According to the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor is responsible for the ongoing safety evaluation of the IP(s). The sponsor should promptly notify all concerned investigator(s), the NDA, and the EC in writing of findings that could adversely affect the safety of participants, impact the conduct of the trial, or alter the EC's approval to continue the trial. Study participants should also be informed of any new information that could adversely affect their safety.

The NDPA-CTReg and the G-TrialsGCP state that the sponsor should keep detailed records of the trial-related AEs/ADRs reported by the PI.

The G-CTConduct delineates that the sponsor (or the PI, when delegated) must report all SAEs to the NDA as soon as possible, but no later than seven (7) calendar days upon receiving notice of the event. Additional follow up information must be made available to NDA as soon as possible, but in any case, no later than 15 calendar days. However, the G-TrialsGCP indicates that the PI is responsible for the aforementioned reporting of SAEs to the NDA.

In addition, according to the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor should expedite the reporting of all AEs/ADRs that are both serious and unexpected to all concerned investigator(s)/institutions(s), EC(s), and to the NDA. The expedited reporting should occur within the timeframe and format specified by the NDA. Serious and unexpected AEs/ADRs suspected to be related to the IP(s) should be reported to the relevant EC as soon as possible. If the study is multicenter, the sponsor should ensure that all serious and unexpected AEs/ADRs that occur in other study sites are also reported within 15 calendar days of becoming aware of them.

As set forth in the NDPA-CTReg, the sponsor and the PI must also take appropriate safety measures to protect participants against any immediate hazards to their health and safety. When safety measures are taken, the sponsor must, within three (3) working days, provide written notice to the NDA of this action and the reasons why this action was taken.

As set forth in the NDPA-CTReg, the sponsor or their appointed representative must report any SUSARs within seven (7) days of first knowledge to the NDA and the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST), or a UNCST-accredited EC.

The G-CTConduct further specifies that the sponsor (or the PI, when delegated) must report all SUSARs to the NDA as soon as possible, but no later than seven (7) calendar days of becoming aware of the event. If the initial report is not complete within the seven (7) days, a completed report should be submitted within 15 calendar days of the initial report. SUSAR reports originating from other studies using the same IP internationally must be submitted as soon as possible, but no later than 15 calendar days following notification of the PI by the sponsor.

However, the G-TrialsGCP indicates that the sponsor should report any SUSARs to the NDA within 15 calendar days of becoming aware of the event. The initial reports should be followed promptly by detailed, written follow-up reports after investigations have been completed, no later than 15 calendar days of becoming aware of the event.

According to the NDPA-CTReg and the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor should also inform the PI of any SUSARs which occur during the course of another trial for which the sponsor is responsible, where the reaction relates to the IP used in the trial. The NDA should maintain a record of all IP-related SUSARs reported to the authority.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

Per UGA-31, the NDA has stated that it does not have a template for reporting AEs for clinical trials. The NDA recommends the use of internationally acceptable forms, such as the one provided by the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) (UGA-8).

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

As per the G-TrialsGCP, the principal investigator (PI) is obliged to submit progress reports as required by the sponsor, the institutional ethics committees (ECs) (research ethics committees (RECs) in Uganda), the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST), and the National Drug Authority (NDA). These reports should contain information on:

How the study is progressing
The number of participants included in relation to the number screened and the target sample size
The number of dropouts and withdrawals
Adverse events
If the planned time schedule is still appropriate
The format and frequency of reporting is as prescribed by the relevant authorities.

The NDPA-CTReg and the G-CTConduct also state that the NDA may request the sponsor to submit an interim report. See Schedule 2 of the NDPA-CTReg or UGA-6 for the format of the clinical trial report.

Additionally, per the G-UNCSTreg, although annual renewal of a study is not required, investigators should electronically submit annual progress reports to the UNCST within four (4) weeks following every 12 months of the study for informational purposes only. Failure to do so may result in termination of the research.

Final Report

The NGHRP states that the sponsor is responsible for approving a final study report, regardless of whether the trial has been completed. In addition, the NDPA-CTReg and the G-TrialsGCP require the sponsor to inform the NDA in writing of the conclusion of the trial within 90 days, using the format of the clinical trial report in Schedule 2 of the NDPA-CTReg.

However, according to the G-CTConduct, either the sponsor or PI must notify the NDA upon conclusion of a trial within 90 calendar days using the format conforming to the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH)’s Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (UGA-38). This notification must be accompanied by:

The final soft and hard copies of the clinical trial report as specified
A comprehensive summary of the essential findings of the trial
Evidence of destruction or shipment of remaining investigational products or any other course of action approved by the sponsor
As stated in the G-CTConduct, the definition of the end of the study will be as defined by the specific study protocol. The NDA requires that the PI submit an end of study notification according to the end as defined in the study protocol. End of trial reports will be submitted once the trial data can answer the study endpoints. The NDA defines the end of the trial as a time when the trial ends and end points are available.

The G-TrialsGCP further indicates that upon completion of the trial, the investigator, where applicable, should inform the institution. The investigator/institution should provide the EC with a summary of the trial’s outcome and furnish the regulatory authorities with any reports required. All aspects (statistical and clinical) of the protocol should be integrated in order to obtain a final study report that is entirely consistent with the study data generated. Essential elements in the presentation of the results include:

Baseline comparisons between the treatment groups
The number of participants actually randomized into the study by treatment group and the number of participants excluded from any of the analyses, by reason and by treatment group
Major efficacy and safety results by treatment group in the form of tables, graphs, test variables, and statistical parameters, as appropriate
An assessment of between-group differences with confidence intervals
An account must be made of missing, unused, or spurious data during statistical analyses. All omissions of this type must be documented to enable review.

In accordance with the G-UNCSTreg, it is the investigator’s obligation to submit final reports of the research projects to the UNCST. Investigators are free to adopt any format for writing a final report, but the report should have an abstract, a results section, a discussion of the results, and recommendations. Investigators who are foreign nationals are required to submit a study completion report before returning to their countries.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
As defined in the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, the G-GMPAnnexes, and the G-TrialsGCP, a sponsor is the person, company, institution, or organization that takes responsibility for the initiation, management, or financing of a clinical trial. The NGHRP specifically assigns responsibility to the sponsor for providing all the necessary financial support to initiate and complete a research study.

The NDPA-CTReg also specifies that in order to submit a clinical trial application, the sponsor must be one (1) of the following:

The drug patent holder
A licensed person (a pharmacist)
The drug manufacturer
An agent of the drug patent holder or the drug manufacturer
As stated in the G-TrialsGCP, a sponsor may transfer any or all of the sponsor's trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO), but the ultimate responsibility for the quality and integrity of the trial data always rests with the sponsor. The CRO must have the required skills, experience, and competencies to safely conduct clinical trials. Any trial-related duty and function that is transferred to and assumed by a CRO should be specified in writing and evidence of a mutual agreement provided. The sponsor should ensure oversight of any trial-related duties and functions carried out on the sponsor’s behalf, including trial-related duties and functions that are subcontracted to another party by the sponsor's contracted CRO(s). Any trial-related duties and functions not specifically transferred to and assumed by a CRO are retained by the sponsor.

Per the NDPA-CTReg, a local company in Uganda may act as an agent in the clinical trial for a foreign sponsor.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Overview

As per the NDPA-CTReg and the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor oversees the selection of the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical trial. The G-CTConduct indicates that based on the clinical trial agreement between the sponsor and the principal investigator (PI), the National Drug Authority (NDA) will liaise with the in-country PI representing the sponsor regarding the application. The PI should be a Ugandan resident (local) and licensed by the relevant body in Uganda.

The G-TrialsGCP states that before entering an agreement with an investigator to conduct a trial, the sponsor should provide the investigator with the protocol and an up-to-date Investigator's Brochure (IB). The investigator should also be given sufficient time to review the protocol and the information provided. The PI/investigator(s) should be qualified by education, training, and experience to assume responsibility for the proper conduct of the trial, meet all the qualifications specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and provide evidence of such qualifications through an up-to-date curriculum vitae and/or other relevant documentation requested by the sponsor, the accredited institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda), and/or the NDA. The PI/investigator(s) should also be thoroughly familiar with the appropriate use of the investigational product(s) (IP(s)), as described in the protocol, current IB, product information, and other information sources provided by the sponsor. Furthermore, the PI/investigator(s) should be aware of, and comply with, good clinical practice (GCP) and the applicable regulatory requirements.

According to the NDPA-CTReg, an application for additional investigators, change of investigator, or additional clinical trial sites must be made using Form 36 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg or using UGA-13. The application must be accompanied by evidence of ethical approval of the clinical trial protocol amendment, where applicable, and the prescribed fees.

In accordance with the G-UNCSTreg, all investigators who are foreign nationals are required to identify and become affiliated with a local organization appropriate for their type of research in Uganda. Investigators arrange the affiliation themselves with the local organization. The investigator should obtain a letter of recommendation from the local organization and submit it to the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST).

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

The NDPA-CTReg states that in the case of foreign sponsors, a local company in Uganda must submit a letter of authorization from the holder of the patent of the drug, licensed person, or manufacturer of the drug to be the agent in the clinical trial that is responsible for all matters pertaining to the NDA clinical trial certificate. See Form 30 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg or UGA-18 for the letter of authorization, and Form 34 in Schedule 1 of the NDPA-CTReg for the clinical trial certificate.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

According to the NGHRP, the G-TrialsGCP, and the NDPA-CTReg, the sponsor is responsible for establishing a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) (also referred to as an Independent Data-Monitoring Committee (IDMC)) prior to the trial’s commencement. Per the NGHRP, the DSMB ensures that the study and the data are handled in accordance with the protocol provisions, monitors adverse events/adverse drug reactions and safety data, and preserves the integrity and credibility of the trial. The composition of the DSMB must be provided to the EC. All Phase I, Phase II, and Phase III trials must have a safety monitoring plan and a DSMB. For additional details on DSMB requirements, see 3.6.2 of the NGHRP.

The G-TrialsGCP further indicates that a DSMB should have written operating procedures and maintain written records of all its meetings. A duly signed DSMB charter must be submitted to the NDA prior to recruitment of participants, and any decision not to create a DSMB should be clearly documented and justified in the protocol.

Multicenter Studies

The G-TrialsGCP indicates that multicenter trials must adhere to all national regulatory requirements, ensuring consideration and adaptation of the local context into the general study design. The following should be considered regarding multicenter trials:

Inclusion and exclusion criteria must be appropriate to consider local realities, as well as trial site-specific differences
The informed consent procedure must be tailored to local conditions and informed consent forms translated into the local language submitted to the EC for approval
Study design differences between the Ugandan site(s) and other sites must be fully explained, as well as differences between sites within Uganda Study extrapolations and conclusions should be relevant to the Ugandan context
Where necessary, site investigators should develop site-specific standard operating procedures and/or a site implementation plan to guide the respective sites on protocol implementation
Per the G-TrialsGCP, for multicenter trials, the PI is responsible for appointing co-investigators that will be responsible for the various trial sites in Uganda. However, it is the responsibility of the sponsor to ensure all investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the approved protocol. In addition, the sponsor should ensure that:

The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication between investigators at the various sites is facilitated
Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Insurance

As set forth in the NDPA-CTReg and the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor is responsible for providing insurance coverage for any unforeseen injury to research participants. The sponsor should provide indemnity for the investigator(s) against claims arising from the clinical trial, except for claims that arise from malpractice or negligence.

According to the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, and the G-InsuranceCover, an insurance certificate must be provided to the National Drug Authority (NDA) that is specific to the trial for which the clinical trial application is being submitted. The G-CTConduct and the NDPA-CTReg also indicate that the clinical trial application must provide evidence that each member of the clinical trial team is covered by relevant malpractice insurance for the trial.

The G-InsuranceCover further states that the required insurance coverage for research participants in a specific trial at a given site must be obtained from a local insurance company that is registered and operating under law in Uganda. For additional details on the required elements of the insurance policy, see Section 7.0 of the G-InsuranceCover.

According to the G-TrialsGCP, the principal investigator (PI) is responsible for ensuring participants obtain their claim from the local insurance company in the event of any trial-related injury and/or resultant disability.

Compensation

Per the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor must ensure that information on incentives offered to participants is included in the protocol and informed consent documents. If the study is multicenter, information on the incentives given at all the different trial sites must be provided. If the participating sites are multinational, then the differences in the incentives across the sites must also be explained.

According to the NGHRP, a care package for research participants should be prepared before initiation of a research project. Care and treatment for research participants should be provided with the ideal aim of providing the best proven intervention.

Injury or Death

In accordance with the NGHRP, the sponsor is responsible for providing compensation to research participants and/or their legal heirs in the event of trial-related injuries, disability, or death. The sponsor must ensure that participants who suffer any trial-related injuries receive free medical treatment for such injuries, and financial or other assistance that would compensate them equitably for any resulting impairment, disability, or handicap. The sponsor should provide care until complete cure or stabilization of a trial-related injury. The investigator and/or study sponsor must pay the cost of referral and management of the condition when a referral has been made for a trial-related injury or a serious adverse event related to the study. Furthermore, the sponsor is required to ensure that research participants are not asked to waive their legal rights to seek compensation.

Per the NGHRP, a trial-related injury may be physical, social, economic, or psychological, and may be classified as follows:

Definitely: When injury is directly caused by participation in a research project
Probably: When injury is most likely explained by participation in a research project but when no definite proof of causality is evident
Possibly: When explanation for injury is equally due to participation in a research project or other cause
Unlikely: When injury is more likely explained by another cause other than participation in a research project
Subject to applicable laws in Uganda, research participants will be entitled to compensation when injury related to their participation in a research project is classified as “Probably” or “Definitely.”

According to the NGHRP, the sponsor and investigator must put in place a mechanism for compensating trial-related injury at the commencement of a study. The mechanism, which may include, inter alia, insurance, and medical care, should be acceptable to the institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda). The EC, research participant, and/or investigator may initiate the compensation process. The EC, sponsor, and investigator must agree on an appropriate mechanism for arbitration.

Trial Participation

In the clinical trial application made to the NDA, the applicant must explain how the participant(s) will be compensated for their time and other inconveniences, in accordance with the G-CTConduct and the NDPA-CTReg.

In addition, per the NGHRP, participants must be fairly compensated for inconveniences, time spent, and expenses incurred while taking part in a study such as travel costs, refreshments, meals, and any other compensation deemed appropriate by the EC. Research participants may also receive free medical services. The compensation or medical services must not be so out of proportion as to induce prospective research participants to consent to participate in the trial against their better judgment.

According to the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor must ensure that participants are reimbursed for all reasonable costs incurred by their participation in the trial.

Post-Trial Access

In accordance with the NGHRP, the duration and sustainability of care and treatment for the participant after the study should be negotiated before initiation of the study. Sponsors are encouraged, but not obliged, to provide care for concurrent illnesses not associated with the research project. However, investigators and sponsors are obliged to manage serious adverse events related to the study (including paying for associated costs thereof) until they are fully resolved or stabilized. Investigators should provide relevant follow up procedures for participants for an appropriate period of time after the trial.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

The NDPA-CTReg states that the sponsor should maintain quality assurance and quality control systems for the conduct of clinical trials and for the generation of documentation, recording, and reporting of data. The G-TrialsGCP indicates that the sponsor is also responsible for implementing the systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, documented (recorded), and reported in compliance with the protocol, good clinical practice (GCP), and the applicable regulatory requirement(s). Quality control should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been processed correctly.

According to the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor should implement a quality management system throughout all stages of the trial process, and should focus on the trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach including critical process and data identification, risk identification, risk evaluation, risk control, risk communication, risk review, and risk reporting. For additional details, see the G-TrialsGCP.

Monitoring Requirements

As per the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor should ensure that the auditing of clinical trials/systems is conducted in accordance with the sponsor's written procedures on what to audit, how to audit, the frequency of audits, and the form and content of audit reports. The observations and findings of the auditor(s) should be documented and accessible to the institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committees (RECs) in Uganda) and the National Drug Authority (NDA). The audit report should be submitted to the NDA if evidence of GCP or protocol non-compliance is found.

The G-TrialsGCP further states that in accordance with the NDPA-CTReg, the sponsor should appoint a monitor tasked with trial oversight and reporting on the progress of a study. The monitor should ideally have adequate medical, pharmaceutical, and scientific qualifications. The investigator(s) should accept the possibility of an audit or monitoring visit by an independent auditor appointed by the sponsor, and/or an inspection by the NDA, EC, or relevant local and international regulatory authorities.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

Per the NDPA-CTReg, in the case of a sponsor-initiated clinical trial termination, the sponsor must notify the NDA within 15 days using the format specified in Schedule 2 of the NDPA-CTReg or UGA-5. The notification must give reasons for the termination, indicate the disposal process for the unused investigational product, and give the effective date of the termination. The G-CTConduct further requires that the sponsor provide evidence of notification to the EC of record and the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST).

In addition, the G-TrialsGCP requires that if a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended for any reason, the investigator should inform the participants, assure appropriate therapy and follow-up for the participants, and inform the NDA. Furthermore, if the investigator terminates or suspends a trial without prior agreement of the sponsor, the investigator should inform the institution where applicable, and the investigator/institution should inform the sponsor and the EC. The investigator should provide the sponsor and the EC with a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

According to the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor should utilize appropriately qualified individuals to supervise the overall conduct of the trial, handle the data, verify the data, conduct the statistical analyses, and prepare the trial reports. When using electronic trial data handling or remote electronic trial data systems, the sponsor should:

Ensure and document that the electronic data processing system(s) conform(s) to the sponsor's established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistent intended performance
Maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) for using these systems
Ensure that the systems are designed to permit data changes in such a way that the data changes are documented and that there is no deletion of entered data
Maintain a security system that prevents unauthorized access to the data, and a list of the individuals who are authorized to make data changes
Maintain adequate backup of the data
Safeguard the blinding, if any
Ensure the integrity of the data, including any data that describes the context, content, and structure
For additional details, see Section 4.8 of the G-TrialsGCP.

The G-TrialsGCP states that quality control should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been processed correctly. The sponsor should base their approach to validation of electronic data processing systems on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use of the system and the potential of the system to affect human participant protection and reliability of trial results. The sponsor should maintain a documented record of SOPs that guide a step-by-step retrospective assessment of data quality and study performance. These SOPs should cover system setup, installation, and use. The SOPs should also describe system validation and functionality testing, data collection and handling, system maintenance, system security measures, change control, data backup, recovery, contingency planning, and decommissioning. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties with respect to the use of these computerized systems should be clear, and the users should be provided with training in their use.

According to the G-TrialsGCP, satisfactory maintenance and back-up procedures for computer databases must be provided. Case report forms (CRFs) should be designed to meet the specific data requirements set out in the study protocol. The effects of missing and inaccurate data should be minimized to maintain data quality. The system for routinely checking the data collection and entry throughout the course of the trial should be documented. Checks for validity and consistency of the database should be on separate items as well as on predetermined combinations of items in the CRFs. The SOP for data editing should ensure that any queries about data validation are brought to the attention of the investigators. Database lock should be done after completion of the validation and editing processes are documented.

Records Management

The G-TrialsGCP and the G-CTConduct state that the sponsor and the PI are responsible for archiving and ensuring the safety of all trial-related documentation. Per the NDPA-CTReg, the sponsor must keep the records, documents, and information provided to the National Drug Authority (NDA) in the clinical trial application for unregistered investigational products (IPs) at the clinical trial site for 20 years following the trial's completion. Documentation for trials involving IPs to be registered should be kept for two (2) years after the registration of the IP. For an IP used in a clinical trial, the sponsor must, at the clinical trial site, maintain:

The Investigator's Brochure (IB) for the IP and a record of the changes made to the IB, if any, including the rationale for each change
A record of the adverse events (AEs) of the IP that occurred inside or outside Uganda, showing the indication for use and the dosage form of the IP at the time of the AE
A record of the participants with their identifications and contacts
A record of the shipment and receipt of the IP and where applicable, a record of the return of the IP or a record of the destruction of the IP, which must be in accordance with the prescribed process
A copy of the protocol and consent forms
The G-CTConduct further states that the holder of the clinical trial certificate should inform the NDA in writing prior to destroying the documents. Documents may be stored in electronic (soft and scanned) or hard copies.

In addition, the G-TrialsGCP requires that if the sponsor discontinues the clinical development of an IP, the sponsor should maintain all sponsor-specific essential documents for at least two (2) years after formal discontinuation. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s)/institution(s) in writing of the need for record retention and should notify the investigator(s)/institution(s) in writing when the trial-related records are no longer needed.

According to the NGHRP, collaborating research partners must agree on appropriate data access and use rights before commencement of the study. Investigators must have in place mechanisms for maintaining the confidentiality of research participants and their communities. Furthermore, a collaborating research partner must not transfer data to a third party without the written consent of the other partner. Local investigators must have unrestricted access rights to data sets collected through a collaborative research project. Lastly, investigators must ensure that research records from which the data has been obtained are available at the research site for at least five (5) years after completion of the research project. Electronic records are acceptable.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Responsible Parties

As per the NITA-U-PrivAct, the data controller determines the purposes for and the manner in which personal data is processed or is to be processed. The “data processor” processes personal data on behalf of the data controller. Data controllers and processors must be registered with the Personal Data Protection Office (PDPO) of the National Information Technology Authority - Uganda (NITA-U). See the NITA-U-PrivAct, the NITA-U-PrivReg, and the PDPO-Note for detailed registration requirements.

Data Protection

As per the NITA-U-PrivAct, a data controller or processor must:

Be accountable to the data subject for data collected, processed, held, or used
Collect and process data fairly and lawfully
Collect, process, use, or hold adequate, relevant, and not excessive or unnecessary personal data
Retain personal data for the period authorized by law or for which the data is required
Ensure quality of information collected, processed, used, or held
Ensure transparency and participation of the data subject in the collection, processing, use, and holding of the personal data
Observe security safeguards in respect of the data
The NITA-U-PrivReg indicates that every data collector, data processor, and data controller registered under the NITA-U-PrivReg must submit an annual report to the PDPO within 90 days after the end of every financial year. The report must contain a summary of all complaints received and the status of such complaints (including whether the complaint was resolved or is still pending), as well as all data breaches and the action taken to address such data breaches. See UGA-41 for a template of the annual report. See Part III of the NITA-U-PrivAct and NITA-U-PrivReg for detailed requirements on data processing, record retention, and processing of personal data outside Uganda.

Additionally, as per UGA-43, the PDPO launched a Data Protection and Privacy Compliance Toolkit to help organizations comply with NITA-U-PrivAct. The Toolkit is a comprehensive resource that includes practical tools, templates, and step-by-step guidance that organizations can use to assess their data protection practices, identify gaps, and take corrective actions. For more details and to access the toolkit, individuals should contact compliance@pdpo.go.ug.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

As delineated in the NITA-U-PrivAct, for the purposes of processing personal data, consent means any freely given, specific, informed, and unambiguous indication of the data subject’s wish which, by a statement or by a clear affirmative action, signifies agreement to the collection or processing of the data subject’s personal data.

According to the NITA-U-PrivAct, a data controller or data processor must obtain the consent of the data subject before collecting or processing personal data, and the data must be collected for a lawful, specific purpose. Unless otherwise provided under the NITA-U-PrivAct, a data subject has the right to object to the collection or processing of personal data at any time. See the NITA-U-PrivAct and NITA-U-PrivReg for detailed requirements on consent to data collection or processing, record retention, and processing of personal data outside Uganda.

The NITA-U-PrivAct and NITA-U-PrivReg further state that data subjects have a right to (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Request a data controller to give a description of the personal data held by the controller
Prevent processing of personal data
Appeal a decision to continue processing personal data
Request a data controller to correct or delete personal data about the data subject that is inaccurate, irrelevant, excessive, out of date, incomplete, misleading, or obtained unlawfully
See the NITA-U-PrivAct and NITA-U-PrivReg for more information on data subject rights.

Children

According to the NITA-U-PrivAct, personal data relating to children must not be collected or processed unless it is carried out with the prior consent of the parent/legal guardian; is necessary to comply with the law; or is for research or statistical purposes. The NITA-U-PrivReg further requires that every data collector, data processor, and data controller establish a system to determine the age of participants whose personal data is to be collected, processed, or stored, and where the data relates to a child, describe the manner of obtaining consent of a parent/legal guardian, where necessary.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Ugandan clinical trials, a freely given informed consent is required to be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the NGHRP and the G-TrialsGCP.

As per the NGHRP, the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, and the G-TrialsGCP, the informed consent form (ICF) and the participant information leaflet are viewed as essential documents that must be reviewed and approved by an accredited institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda) and provided to the National Drug Authority (NDA) with the clinical trial application. (See the Required Elements section for details on what should be included in the ICF.)

The G-TrialsGCP states that before informed consent may be obtained, the principal investigator (PI), or a person designated by the PI, should provide the participant or legal representative/guardian ample time and opportunity to inquire about details of the trial and to decide whether or not to participate in the trial. All questions about the trial should be answered to the satisfaction of the participant or legal representative/guardian.

As stated in the NGHRP, an investigator must seek informed consent only after ascertaining that the prospective research participant has adequate understanding of the relevant facts and of the consequences of participation. For certain types of research, the EC may require the investigator to administer a comprehension test (or test of understanding) to ensure that prospective research participants have acquired adequate understanding of the relevant facts and of the consequences of participation.

Per the G-TrialsGCP, if a participant is unable to read or if the legal representative/guardian is unable to read, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. The written ICF and any other written information to be provided to participants should be read and explained to the participant or legal representative/guardian. According to the NGHRP, verbal consent may be obtained in studies that present no more than minimal risk or in studies where for justifiable reasons written consent may not be feasible. ECs reserve the right to determine when verbal informed consent may be appropriate and acceptable.

Additionally, as stated in the G-TrialsGCP, the language used in the oral and written information about the trial, including the written ICF, should be as non-technical as practical and should be understandable to the participant or legal representative/guardian and the impartial witness, where applicable. Neither the PI, nor the trial staff, should coerce or unduly influence a participant to participate or to continue to participate in a trial. None of the oral and written information concerning the trial, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive any legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator, the institution, the sponsor, or their agents from liability for negligence and/or malpractice.

See the NGHRP and the G-TrialsGCP for detailed requirements for obtaining consent.

Re-Consent

According to the G-TrialsGCP, the written ICF and any other written information to be provided to participants should be revised whenever important new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s consent. Any revised written ICF and written information should receive the EC's approval/favorable opinion in advance of use. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participation in the trial. The communication of this information should be documented.

The NGHRP specifies that re-consent from participants must be obtained if there are changes in the conditions or procedures of the research or if new information becomes available that could affect the participant’s willingness to continue in the research.

Language Requirements

As per the NGHRP and the G-CTConduct, the ICF should be written in English and in a vernacular language that the participant is able to understand. The G-TrialsGCP further indicates that for multicenter trials, the informed consent procedure must be tailored to local conditions, and ICFs must be translated into the local language and submitted to the EC for approval.

Documenting Consent

The G-TrialsGCP and the NGHRP state that prior to participation in the trial, the written ICF should be signed and personally dated by the participant or legal representative/guardian, and by the person who conducted the informed consent discussion.

The G-TrialsGCP delineates that the impartial witness for participants unable to read should sign and personally date the ICF, after the participant or legal representative/guardian has orally consented to the participation in the trial. If capable of doing so, the participant or legal representative/guardian should sign and personally date the ICF. By signing the ICF, the impartial witness attests that the information in the ICF and any other written information was accurately explained to, and apparently understood by, the participant or legal representative/guardian, and that informed consent was freely given.

According to the NGHRP, a thumbprint on the ICF is also acceptable in lieu of a signature. Where the use of signed consent forms is not feasible, alternative viable methods should be employed.

The G-TrialsGCP and the NGHRP indicate that a copy of the signed ICF must be offered to the participant or legal representative/guardian prior to participation in the trial. The G-TrialsGCP further specifies that during the course of the trial, the participant or legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated consent form updates and a copy of any amendments to the written information provided to the participant.

Waiver of Consent

According to the NGHRP, an EC may waive some or all of the requirements for the investigator to obtain informed consent and/or a signed/thumb-printed consent form for some or all of the research participants of a particular study if the EC determines that:

The research project carries no more than minimal risk (risk that is no more than the risks encountered in normal daily life in a stable society)
The research project could not practicably be carried out without the waiver or alteration (whenever appropriate the research participants will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation)
Deception needs to be applied to achieve the objectives of the study
The only record linking the research participant and the research project would be the ICF and the risk to the research participant would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality
The research participant is involved in an emergency situation and informed consent cannot be reasonably obtained from the individual or the representative
Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Based on the NGHRP and the G-TrialsGCP, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study involves research and an explanation of its nature and purpose
The procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The expected duration of the trial
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment (where appropriate)
The participant's responsibilities
Those aspects of the trial that are experimental
Any reasonably foreseeable risks or discomforts to the participant (when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant), and whether the project involves more than minimal risk
Any benefits to the participant or to others that may be reasonably expected from the research; if no benefit is expected, the participant should also be made aware of this
The disclosure of specific appropriate alternative procedures or therapies available to the participant
The requirement to preserve the confidentiality of the participant
Allowed access by the sponsor, National Drug Authority (NDA), Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST), relevant institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda), and/or other regulatory authority including international regulatory authorities (pending that they have received permission to do so from UNCST) to participant records
The policy on compensation and/or medical treatment(s) available to the participant in the event of a trial-related injury within the framework of clinical trials insurance and where further information may be obtained
Where applicable, a statement of how the researcher will provide medical services to the participant
The nature, form, and extent of compensation for participation (e.g., reimbursement for transport, time, and meals)
The identity of a sponsor and any potential conflict of interests
A brief description of sponsors of the research project and the organizational affiliation of the researchers
A contact name and number of the principal investigator and/or site investigator
Names and contact details of individual(s) who should be contacted at any time in case of questions about the research project, as well as the participants’ rights and welfare. The individual(s) should be able to communicate in a language understandable by the participant or should be able to promptly secure the services of an interpreter to assist in responding to the participant’s questions
Participation is voluntary, the participant can withdraw from the study at any time, and withdrawal or refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled
A statement that participants will get feedback on findings and progress of the study, and that any new information that affects the study or data that has clinical relevance to participants (including incidental findings) will be made available to research participants and/or their health care providers
The participant or legal representative/guardian will be notified in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the study which may affect the participant's willingness to continue
A witness may represent vulnerable populations during the informed consent process, if applicable
The study has been approved by an accredited Ugandan-based EC
A statement that a particular treatment or procedure may involve risks to the participant (or to the embryo or fetus, if the participant is or may become pregnant), which are currently unforeseeable
The foreseeable circumstances and/or reasons under which participation in the trial may be terminated, whether or not the participant consents to such termination
Additional costs/expenses to the participant that may result from participation in the study
The consequences of a participant’s decision to withdraw from the research and procedures for orderly withdrawal by the participant
The approximate number of participants in the research study
If the research involves collecting biological or genetic materials, participants must be provided with an explanation on how specimens will be managed at the end of the study. If samples will be stored for future use, separate consent should be obtained
Whether, when, and how any of the products or interventions proven by the study to be safe and effective will be made available to participants at the end of the study, and if the participants will be expected to pay for them
Compensation Disclosure

According to the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor must ensure that information on incentives offered to participants is included in the informed consent documents. If the study is multicenter, information on the incentives given at all the different trial sites must be provided. If the participating sites are multinational, then the differences in the incentives across the sites must also be explained.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Overview

The G-TrialsGCP states that in obtaining and documenting informed consent, the principal investigator (PI) or delegate should comply with the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki (UGA-27), the NGHRP, and the G-TrialsGCP. Additionally, in accordance with the NGHRP and the G-TrialsGCP, a participant’s rights must be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process.

See the Required Elements; Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the NGHRP and the G-TrialsGCP, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

According to the NGHRP and the G-TrialsGCP, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

The NGHRP and the G-TrialsGCP indicate that all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. It is the responsibility of the investigator(s) to safeguard the confidentiality of research data to protect the identity and records of research participants.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

As per the NGHRP and the G-TrialsGCP, the research participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the investigator(s) and the institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda) to address trial-related inquiries in the event of any injury and/or to appeal against a violation of the participants’ rights.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The NGHRP states that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of the participant’s health and welfare must take precedence over the objectives of the research.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
The NGHRP allows the institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda) to waive some or all of the informed consent requirements in instances of emergency situations where consent cannot be reasonably obtained from the participant or legal representative/guardian.

The G-TrialsGCP further states that in emergency situations, when prior consent of the participant is not possible, the consent of the legal representative/guardian, if present, should be requested. When prior consent of the participant is not possible and the legal representative/guardian is not available, enrollment of the participant should require measures that are described in the protocol and/or elsewhere, with documented approval by the EC, to protect the rights, safety, and well-being of the participant and to ensure compliance with applicable regulatory requirements. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible and provide consent to continue or other consent as appropriate, should this be requested.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Overview

According to the NGHRP, additional safeguards must be included in a study to protect vulnerable populations. Vulnerable populations are characterized as research participants who are incapable of protecting their own interests due to insufficient power, intelligence, education, resources, strength, or other requisite attributes. These participants are also considered to be vulnerable due to their limited capacity or freedom to provide or decline consent. Vulnerable populations include children/minors, prisoners, the homeless, substance abusers, mentally and physically handicapped, armed forces, terminally ill, and pregnant women. Characteristics that constitute vulnerability in such populations include one (1) or more of the following:

Limited economic empowerment
Conflict and post-conflict situations
Inadequate protection of human rights
Discrimination on the basis of health status
Limited availability of health care and treatment options
Communities in acute disaster and disease epidemics
As per the G-TrialsGCP, vulnerable participants also include individuals whose willingness to volunteer in a clinical trial may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation, or of a retaliatory response from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate. Examples are members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention.

The NGHRP states that where appropriate, there should be a provision for involvement of a community in the research process right from inception to post research period. Additionally, the institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda) must carefully consider and approve the mode of consent for participants from vulnerable populations. In order to protect vulnerable communities, ECs must ensure that selection of the particular community is justified by the research goals, and the research is relevant to the needs and priorities of the community in which it is to be conducted.

Per the NGHRP, for all vulnerable populations and individuals:

Research can only be conducted in the population and with individuals if the objectives of the research cannot be addressed using non-vulnerable populations and individuals
Risk of participating in research is justified by anticipated benefits
The intervention or procedure presents experiences that are commensurate with those inherent in their actual or expected medical, dental, psychological, social, or educational situations
The intervention or procedure is likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the population or individual’s disorder or condition that is of vital importance for the understanding or amelioration of that disorder or condition
ECs may co-opt a person knowledgeable about and has experience working with the vulnerable group and individuals
The G-TrialsGCP further indicates that special protections for vulnerable populations can include:

Allowing no more than minimal risks for procedures that offer no potential individual/direct benefits for participants
Supplementing the participant’s agreement by the permission of family members, legal guardians, or other appropriate representatives
Requiring that the research be carried out only when it is targeting conditions that affect these populations
Safeguards can be designed to promote voluntary decision-making, limit the potential for confidentiality breaches, and otherwise work to protect the interests of those at increased risk of harm
Appointment of advocates to the EC when such proposals for clinical trials on institutionalized individuals are under review
See the Children/Minors and Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations. See the NGHRP and the G-TrialsGCP for more examples of and details on vulnerable populations.

Persons in Hierarchical Relationships

As per the G-TrialsGCP, there is a possibility of diminished voluntariness of consent from potential participants who are in a subordinate relationship. Their agreement to volunteer may be unduly influenced, whether justified or not, by the expectation of preferential treatment if they agree to participate in the study or by fear of disapproval or retaliation if they refuse. Examples include medical and nursing students; subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel; workers in settings where research studies are conducted; and members of the armed forces or police.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
The NGHRP and the G-CTChldrnWmn define a child as a person below the age of 18.

According to the G-CTChldrnWmn, data supporting the conduct of a clinical trial involving children should demonstrate that the benefit to the population outweighs the risk. For interventions or procedures that have no potential individual benefits for children:

The risks must be minimized and no more than minimal;
The purpose of the research must be to obtain knowledge relevant to the particular health needs of the population;
The social value of the research for the children is compelling, and the research cannot be conducted in any other population; and
Any research-related risk is the least possible for achieving the objectives of the research
While consent from the child’s parent or guardian is required in most cases, the NGHRP does allow for mature and emancipated minors, as described below, to provide consent. As per the NGHRP, mature minors are defined as individuals 14-17 years of age who have drug or alcohol dependency or a sexually transmitted infection. Emancipated minors are defined as individuals below the age of majority (18 years) who are pregnant, married, have a child, or are self-sufficient. Mature and emancipated minors are permitted to independently provide informed consent to participate in research if the following conditions exist:

The institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda) approves the research study as acceptable to the parents/legal guardians based on evidence from the community
The protocol provides clear justification for targeting mature and emancipated minors as participants, and for not involving parents/legal guardians in the consent process
Assent Requirements

The NGHRP requires a child’s affirmative agreement to participate in research when the child is eight (8) years of age and older. A child's assent is obtained after the parent’s/legal guardian’s consent is obtained. The child’s assent or dissent takes precedence over the parent’s/legal guardian’s consent.

The G-CTChldrnWmn further indicates that for pediatric studies, adequate provisions should be made for soliciting the assent of the children and permission of their parents/legal guardians. Investigators should provide an understandable age-specific informed assent and information sheet for children.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
The G-CTChldrnWmn states that data supporting the conduct of a clinical trial involving pregnant/lactating women should demonstrate that the benefit to the population outweighs the risk. For interventions or procedures that have no potential individual benefits for pregnant/lactating women:

The risks must be minimized and no more than minimal;
The purpose of the research must be to obtain knowledge relevant to the particular health needs of the population;
The social value of the research for the pregnant/lactating women is compelling, and the research cannot be conducted in any other population; and
Any research-related risk is the least possible for achieving the objectives of the research
According to the G-CTChldrnWmn, legally valid consent should be obtained from the participant or spouse as appropriate and in line with the NGHRP. As per the NGHRP, any Ugandan clinical studies involving pregnant women and fetuses require additional safeguards to ensure that the research conforms to appropriate ethical standards and upholds societal values. Informed consent should be obtained from both the mother and father of the embryos and fetuses. However, the father's consent is not required if: (i) the purpose of the study is primarily to meet the mother's health needs; (ii) the father's identity and/or whereabouts are unknown; (iii) the father is not reasonably available; or (iv) the pregnancy resulted from rape or incest and (v) the father is incompetent to give consent.

The G-CTChldrnWmn further indicates that for clinical trials involving pregnant women that have the potential for harm to the fetus, the participant should be informed about the potential risks, and research should be conducted only after assessing that the benefits (to the mother or fetus, as appropriate) outweigh the risk involved, and with informed consent of the participants.

(See the Required Elements section for general informed consent form requirements.)

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
The G-TrialsGCP states that residents of prisons are often considered vulnerable because in a confined setting, they have few options and are denied certain freedoms that non-institutionalized persons enjoy. Some individuals with this characteristic may also have diminished capacity to consent, and therefore require the additional protections for participants who lack decisional capacity.

Institutional ethics committees (ECs) (research ethics committees (RECs) in Uganda) must review the need for special protection of the rights and welfare of these vulnerable populations and include protections when necessary.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
The G-TrialsGCP states that residents of mental institutions are often considered vulnerable because in a confined setting, they have few options and are denied certain freedoms that non-institutionalized persons enjoy. Some individuals with this characteristic may also have diminished capacity to consent, and therefore require the additional protections for participants who lack decisional capacity.

Institutional ethics committees (ECs) (research ethics committees (RECs) in Uganda) must review the need for special protection of the rights and welfare of these vulnerable populations and include protections when necessary.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
As delineated in the NGHRP, the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, the G-GMPAnnexes, and the G-TrialsGCP, an investigational product (IP) (also referred to as an investigational medicinal product (IMP) in Uganda) is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or a placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. Per the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, the G-GMPAnnexes, and the G-TrialsGCP, an IP includes a product with registration when used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a way different from the approved form; when used for an unapproved indication; or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 25, 2025
Manufacturing

According to the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, and the G-TrialsGCP, the National Drug Authority (NDA) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) in Uganda. The NDA will only approve the manufacture of an IP after approval of the clinical trial application. The NDPA-CTReg indicates that if the IP is to be manufactured in Uganda, the holder of the clinical trial certificate must apply to the NDA for a manufacturing license.

Uganda follows the G-GMPMedicinal, the G-GMP-APIs, and the G-GMPAnnexes for good manufacturing practice (GMP), which were adopted from Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S) guidance. Per the G-GMPMedicinal, the holder of the NDA’s manufacturing authorization must manufacture IPs to ensure that they are fit for their intended use; comply with the requirements of the clinical trial authorization; and do not place participants at risk due to inadequate safety, quality, or efficacy. The G-GMPAnnexes further states that for manufacturers to be able to apply and comply with GMP for IPs, cooperation between manufacturers and sponsors of clinical trials is required. This cooperation should be described in a technical agreement between the sponsor and manufacturer.

The G-GMP-APIs indicates that when manufacturing active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) for use in clinical trials, process and test procedures should be flexible to provide for changes as knowledge of the process increases and clinical testing of a drug product progresses from pre-clinical stages through clinical stages. Once drug development reaches the stage where the API is produced for use in IPs, manufacturers should ensure that APIs are manufactured in suitable facilities using appropriate production and control procedures to ensure the quality of the API. Additionally, the manufacture of APIs for use in clinical trials should be documented in laboratory notebooks, batch records, or by other appropriate means.

See the G-GMPMedicinal, the G-GMP-APIs, and the G-GMPAnnexes for more detailed manufacturing requirements.

Import

The NDA is responsible for authorizing the import of IPs. The NDPA-CTReg and the G-CTConduct state that prior to IP import or manufacture, the sponsor or principal investigator (PI) must be granted a clinical trial certificate by the NDA. According to the NDPA-CTReg, the holder of the clinical trial certificate must then apply for a permit to import the IP approved for the trial.

According to the G-VerImprtExprt, an application for an import verification certificate under extraordinary circumstances (which include clinical trials approved by the NDA) must be submitted electronically through the National Drug Authority Management Information System (NDAMIS) (UGA-34) by a person duly authorized to import drugs into Uganda (an import license holder). The G-VerImprtExprt includes clinical trials approved by the NDA in its definition of “extraordinary circumstances.” The application should be accompanied by:

A clinical trial certificate for drugs for use in clinical trials
A copy of the proforma invoice from the supplier
A donation certificate, if applicable
Authorization for drugs to be used in a medical camp, if applicable
Evidence of current GMP compliance of the manufacturer. The manufacturer should have GMP certification issued by the NDA, or the national medicines regulatory authorities of the following countries/regions: the United States of America (USA), the European Union (EU), the United Kingdom (UK), Switzerland, Canada, Australia, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, or prequalified by the World Health Organization
Documented evidence/justification describing the emergency or extraordinary circumstance
A filled application form for the authorization for importation of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and precursors, if applicable
Evidence of registration of the drug(s) in the country of origin or emergency use approval of the drug by the competent authority in the country of origin, by a supranational body and any other regulatory authority if not registered
As stated in the G-VerImprtExprt, the application is screened for completion and correctness, then the applicant is billed the prescribed fees (see the NDPA-FeesReg and the NDPA-AmendFeesReg for more information). The NDA will issue a verification certificate upon receipt of a successful application. The verification certificate is valid for 12 months from the date of issue.

See the G-VerImprtExprt for detailed import permit application submission requirements and review procedures. Additionally, see the Submission Process, Submission Content, and Regulatory Fees sections for detailed clinical trial application requirements.

Please note: Uganda is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (UGA-3), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see UGA-21.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Investigator's Brochure

In accordance with the NDPA-CTReg, the sponsor is responsible for updating the Investigator’s Brochure (IB), which is a compilation of the clinical and non-clinical data on the investigational product(s) (IPs). The G-TrialsGCP further indicates that the IB should be reviewed at least annually and revised as necessary in compliance with a sponsor's written procedures. Relevant new information may be so important that it should be communicated to the investigator(s), and possibly to the institutional ethics committee(s) (ECs) (research ethics committees (RECs) in Uganda) and/or regulatory authorities, before it is included in a revised IB.

According to the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor is generally responsible for ensuring that an up-to-date IB is made available to the investigator(s), and the investigators are responsible for providing the up-to-date IB to the responsible ECs and the National Drug Authority (NDA). In the case of an investigator sponsored trial, the sponsor-investigator should determine whether a brochure is available from the commercial manufacturer. If the IP is provided by the sponsor-investigator, then the sponsor-investigator should provide the necessary information to the trial personnel. In cases where preparation of a formal IB is impractical, the sponsor-investigator should provide, as a substitute, an expanded background information section in the trial protocol that contains the minimum current information described in this guideline.

The G-TrialsGCP, the NDPA-CTReg, and UGA-4 require the IB to provide coverage for the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation parameters
Non-clinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects of IP in humans (pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; regulatory and post-marketing experiences)
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator(s)
See Section 7.3 of the G-TrialsGCP for detailed content descriptions, and UGA-4 or Schedule 2 of the NDPA-CTReg for the format of the IB.

Quality Management

Uganda follows the G-GMPMedicinal, the G-GMP-APIs, and the G-GMPAnnexes for good manufacturing practice (GMP), which were adopted from Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S) guidance. Per the G-GMPMedicinal, GMP ensures that products are consistently produced and controlled to the quality standards appropriate to their intended use and as required by the clinical trial authorization. The forementioned documents must be used for periodic GMP inspection of all manufacturers of medicinal products within and outside Uganda whose products are registered or subjected to registration in the country. Manufacturers that are GMP compliant will be issued GMP compliance certificates.

According to the G-CTConduct and the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor must ensure that the IP(s) is manufactured in accordance with GMP. The G-CTConduct further indicates that evidence of manufacture under GMP standards must be submitted with the clinical trial application to the NDA. In cases where the principal investigator (PI) is not the manufacturer and where confidentiality considerations prevent disclosure of certain information to the PI, any relevant IP/application information may be submitted to the NDA through the PI in a sealed envelope marked “CONFIDENTIAL.” Alternatively, the information may be sent to the Clinical Trials Unit with the necessary password protection at clinicaltrials@nda.or.ug.

The G-TrialsGCP states that if significant formulation changes are made in the investigational or comparator product(s) during the course of clinical development, the results of any additional studies of the formulated product(s) (e.g., stability, dissolution rate, bioavailability) needed to assess whether these changes would significantly alter the pharmacokinetic profile of the product should be available prior to the use of the new formulation in clinical trials and submitted to the NDA for review and authorization.

According to the G-GMPAnnexes, the manufacturer should establish and maintain a quality control system placed under the authority of a person who has the requisite qualifications and is independent of production. Quality control of the IP, including that of the comparator product, should be performed in accordance with the information submitted in the application for the clinical trial. See the G-GMPMedicinal and the G-GMPAnnexes for more information on quality control requirements.

Additionally, the G-GMPAnnexes indicates that a pharmaceutical quality system which is designed, set up, and verified by the manufacturer should be described in written procedures, taking into account the guidance in the G-GMPMedicinal that is applicable to IPs. The product specifications and manufacturing instructions may be changed during development, but full control and traceability of the changes should be documented and maintained. The selection, qualification, approval, and maintenance of suppliers of starting materials, together with their purchase and acceptance, should be documented as part of the pharmaceutical quality system to ensure the integrity of the supply chain and protect against falsified products. The product specification file should be continually updated as development of the product proceeds, ensuring appropriate traceability to the previous versions. It should include, or refer to, at least the following documents:

Specifications and analytical methods for starting materials, packaging materials, intermediate product, bulk product, and finished product
Manufacturing methods
In-process testing and methods
Approved label copy
Relevant clinical trial authorizations and amendments thereof, clinical trial protocol, and randomisation codes, as appropriate
Relevant technical agreements with contract givers and acceptors, as appropriate
Stability plan and reports
Details of plans and arrangements for reference and retention samples
Storage and transport conditions
Details of the supply chain including manufacturing, packaging, labeling, and testing sites for the IPs
For more information on pharmaceutical quality system requirements, see the G-GMPMedicinal and the G-GMPAnnexes.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Labeling for investigational products (IPs) (known as investigational medicinal products (IMPs) in Uganda) must comply with the requirements set forth in the G-GMPAnnexes, the NDPA-CTReg, the G-CTConduct, the NGHRP, and the G-TrialsGCP. As specified in the G-GMPAnnexes, the labeling operation should be performed at an authorized manufacturing site.

As per the NGHRP and the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor is responsible for ensuring the proper labeling of the IPs. The IPs and comparator products must be labeled in conformity with the clinical protocol.

According to the NDPA-CTReg and the G-CTConduct, the IP must be labelled as specified in UGA-7 or Form 37 of the NDPA-CTReg. The NDPA-CTReg, the G-GMPAnnexes, and UGA-7 require the following labeling information to be included on both the outer packaging and the immediate container (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor or manufacturer; the G-GMPAnnexes specifies the investigator or contract research organization could also be the main contact for IP information, clinical trial, and emergency unblinding
The name/identifier and strength/potency, and in the case of blinded trials, all product labeling should indicate “placebo/comparator or [name/identifier] + [strength/potency]”
The pharmaceutical dosage form, route of administration, and quantity of dosage units
The batch and/or code number to identify the contents and packaging operation
A trial reference code allowing identification of the trial, site, investigator, and sponsor, if not given elsewhere
The trial participant identification number or treatment number and, where relevant, the visit number
The investigator’s name (if not already provided on the label)
The storage conditions
Pack sizes (unit or volume)
The instructions for use
The period of use (use-by date, expiration date, manufacturing date, or re-test date), in month/year format
“For clinical trial use only” or similar wording
“Keep out of reach of children” except when the IP is for use in trials where it is not taken home by participants
The G-GMPAnnexes further states that where products are blinded, systems should be in place to ensure that the blind is achieved and maintained while allowing for identification of “blinded” products, when necessary, including batch numbers of the products before the blinding operation. Rapid identification of the product should also be possible in an emergency. Where the manufacturer has been delegated the responsibility for generation of randomization codes, the manufacturer should ensure that unblinding information is available to the appropriate responsible investigator site personnel before the IPs are supplied. The expiry date assigned to all products for use in the trial should be the expiry of the shortest dated product so that the blinding is maintained.

For additional detailed labeling information and exceptions, see the G-GMPAnnexes.

The G-TrialsGCP requires that in blinded trials, the coding system for IPs should include a mechanism that permits rapid identification of the products in case of a medical emergency, but does not permit undetectable breaks of the blinding. The G-CTConduct further indicates that a sample of the label for imported products must be included with the clinical trial application to the National Drug Authority (NDA).

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

As delineated in the G-TrialsGCP and the G-CTConduct, the sponsor must ensure timely delivery of the investigational product(s) (IP(s)) to the principal investigator (PI)/investigator(s). Additionally, the sponsor must maintain sufficient quantities of the IP(s) used in the trial to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary. The G-TrialsGCP further states that the sponsor should not supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the IP(s) until the sponsor obtains National Drug Authority (NDA) and institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda) approvals. However, according to the NDPA-CTReg, the PI is responsible and accountable for the IP.

Furthermore, per the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor should ensure that written procedures include instructions that the investigator/institution should follow for the handling and storage of IP(s) for the trial and documentation thereof. The procedures should address adequate and safe receipt, handling, storage, dispensing, retrieval of unused product from participants, and return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor (or alternative disposition if authorized by the sponsor and in compliance with the NDA approved protocol and/or where available, applicable regulatory requirement(s)).

As delineated in the G-GMPAnnexes, IPs are normally packed individually for each participant included in the clinical trial. The number of units to be packaged should be specified prior to the start of the packaging operations, including units necessary for carrying out quality control and for any retention samples to be kept. Sufficient reconciliations should take place to ensure that the correct quantity of each product required has been accounted for at each stage of processing. Procedures should describe the specification, generation, testing, security, distribution, handling, and retention of any randomization code used for packaging IPs, as well as code-break mechanism. Appropriate records should be maintained.

Per the G-GMPAnnexes, packaging must ensure that the IP remains in good condition during transport and storage at intermediate destinations. Any opening or tampering of the outer packaging during transport should be readily discernible. Where the manufacturer is delegated by the sponsor to perform the regulatory release of the IP, the arrangements should be defined in an agreement between the sponsor and the manufacturer. Relevant clinical trial authorization and amendment information should be available for reference in the product specification file, and the manufacturer should ensure the necessary clinical trial authorizations are in place prior to shipping the product for use in the trial.

Per the G-TrialsGCP and the G-CTConduct, the sponsor must also maintain a system for retrieving IP(s), as well as for the disposal of unused IP(s). The G-GMPAnnexes further delineates that returned IPs should be clearly identified and stored in an appropriately controlled, dedicated area. The manufacturer or sponsor’s representative should destroy IPs only with prior written authorization by the sponsor. The arrangements for destruction of IPs must be described in the protocol. Any arrangement between sponsor and manufacturer regarding IP destruction should be defined in their technical agreement. Destruction of unused IPs should be carried out only after reconciliation of delivered, used, and recovered products and after investigation and satisfactory explanation of any discrepancies upon which the reconciliation has been accepted.

See the G-GMPAnnexes, the G-TrialsGCP, and the G-CTConduct for detailed sponsor-related IP requirements.

Record Requirements

As per the G-CTConduct and the G-TrialsGCP, the sponsor must maintain records that document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the IP(s). The sponsor must also maintain a system for documenting the retrieval of IP(s) and the disposal of unused IP(s), as well as records of batch sample analyses and characteristics.

Per the G-GMPAnnexes, there must be sufficient documentation to demonstrate that appropriate segregation has been maintained during any IP packaging operations. To facilitate a recall of the IP, a detailed inventory of the shipments made by the manufacturer should be maintained. Inventory records of returned IPs should be kept. Additionally, records of destruction operations should be retained, including a dated certificate of destruction or a receipt for destruction to the sponsor. These documents should clearly identify or allow traceability to the batches and/or participant numbers involved, and the actual quantities destroyed.

The G-CTConduct indicates that the pharmacist of record must maintain instructions for the handling of IP(s) and trial related materials, if not indicated in the protocol or Investigator’s Brochure (IB). The pharmacist must also maintain shipping records for the IP(s) and trial related material, as well as for receipt date(s) of product delivery and quantity.

According to the G-GMPAnnexes, product specification file documents must be retained for at least five (5) years, and the sponsor should retain the clinical trial master file for at least 25 years after the end of the trial, unless otherwise specified in relevant national laws. If the sponsor and the manufacturer are not the same entity, the sponsor must make appropriate arrangements with the manufacturer to fulfil the clinical trial master file retention requirement. Arrangement for retention of such documents and the type of documents to be retained should be defined in an agreement between the sponsor and manufacturer. Per the G-GMPMedicinal and the G-GMPAnnexes, batch documentation/manufacturing records must be retained by the manufacturer for at least five (5) years after the completion or formal discontinuation of the last clinical trial in which the batch was used.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
In Uganda, a specimen is also referred to as human material. As delineated in the NGHRP, human biological materials consist of any substance obtained from a human research participant. This material includes, but is not limited to: blood, urine, stool, saliva, hair, nail clippings, skin, microorganisms, and other associated bio-products.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
Import/Export

The G-CTConduct states that applications for import and/or export of biological materials, if applicable, must be included in the clinical trial application to the National Drug Authority (NDA).

Additionally, the NGHRP delineates that all exchanges and transfers, including importation and exportation of human materials for research purposes, require Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST) clearance, except for the exchange of human materials between organizations within Uganda. In order to justify transfer of human materials abroad, investigators, sponsors, and collaborators should demonstrate that in-country capacity to perform certain types of investigations/testing does not exist or is inadequate. Per the G-UNCSTreg, where it is proven that no capacity for a given investigation exists in Uganda, or where exchange of research material is needed for quality assurance purposes or other justifiable reasons, research materials may be transferred to, exported to, or exchanged with more advanced facilities abroad.

Per the NGHRP and the G-UNCSTreg, the following are the necessary steps for the exchange or transfer of human materials for research purposes abroad or from abroad:

The research project that involves the exchange or transfer of human material must first be registered by the UNCST
The applicant must be a legal resident of Uganda and be affiliated with a locally registered and recognized organization in Uganda
A request for exchange or transfer of human material must be made in writing to the Executive Secretary of the UNCST
A Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) and any other document related to the exchange or transfer of human material must accompany the request for the exchange or transfer of the material
According to the NGHRP, the UNCST is required to provide feedback within 14 calendar days from the submission date. However, the G-UNCSTreg states that the UNCST must provide feedback within 10 working days from the submission date. The feedback may be an approval or clearance, a rejection or disapproval, or comments to improve the quality of the application. Once the UNCST approval is obtained, the investigator can proceed to facilitate the transfer, export, or exchange of the research specimen.

Material Transfer Agreement

As set forth in the NGHRP and the G-UNCSTreg, the UNCST application for permission to transfer, export, or exchange samples for research purposes from one (1) organization to another, within the country and abroad, must be accompanied by an MTA between the provider organization and the recipient organization. Per the NGHRP, the MTA should include the following details:

A list of the parties and their addresses; the MTA is signed only by authorized party representatives and the effective date of the MTA must be indicated
A detailed description of the materials to be exchanged
The purpose for transfer or export of the human biological substance
A list of authorized users of the materials
The location where the material is to be transferred
Period of use and disposal plans for the material
Clear arrangements for benefit sharing of any accruing or anticipated future benefit at the point of termination
The provider organization should state whether the recipient organization is permitted to own any of the derivatives or products discovered through the use of the material
Directions for handling product commercial rights
Publication requirements/restrictions, including citation requirements if information about the material is published
The governing law(s) of the provider’s and recipient’s countries
Recipient organization’s responsibilities for the proper handling and use of the material
Recipient and provider agreement on liability for any misuse of the material
Description of specific restrictions for the recipient organization
A statement indicating what technologies would be transferred to the provider organization or country, if applicable
A warranty stating that the material is being provided “as is”
A clause stating that the MTA may be amended at any time by written mutual consent of the parties
See Section 10.4 of the NGHRP for detailed MTA requirements. Per the UNCST-RevTemp, data ownership and associated intellectual property rights in both the Data Sharing Agreements and MTAs must be discussed and agreed upon by collaborating partners at the inception of a research study within the context of the investigator's institutional regulations/provisions. Templates of Data Sharing Agreements and MTAs, as applicable, must be presented as part of the research protocol to be reviewed by the institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda).

See the G-Biobank for more information on the collection, receipt, storage, processing, and dissemination of biological specimens by biobanks in Uganda.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: March 10, 2025
In accordance with the NGHRP, investigators must comply with several informed consent requirements for the acquisition, storage, and future use of human biological samples from research participants in Uganda.

For any research involving the collection of human biological or genetic materials, the investigator must provide an explanation to the research participant in the informed consent form (ICF) regarding how the specimens will be managed at the end of the study.

For samples to be stored for future use, the investigator is also required to obtain a separate informed consent from the participant. This process includes the use of a separate ICF that states the following:

The purpose of the sample storage
The quantities of samples to be stored
The location of the stored samples
Measures the investigator will take to protect participant confidentiality
The policies that will govern the use of the samples in future research
The potential risks and benefits of storing samples for future research
Any other information deemed necessary by the investigators, the institutional ethics committee (EC) (research ethics committee (REC) in Uganda), and the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST)
As per the NGHRP, the investigator must also give the research participant the right to choose whether the samples should or should not be stored for future studies. A Ugandan scientist must be included as co-investigator in all future studies using the human materials collected from Uganda. Participants must not be penalized for their refusal to store the samples and reserve the right to withdraw their samples from storage if the samples are linked. Any future research study on such samples is subject to review by an EC. Where identifiable samples have been collected, for example, as part of routine surveillance, emergency procedures, laboratory quality control, notifiable diseases, routine counseling and testing, etc., without the prior intention of conducting research on the samples, the samples’ sources must be traced to provide consent for use of the samples in research.

Requirements
(Legislation) National Drug Policy and Authority Act 1993, (Ch 206) (NDPA-Act) (December 3, 1993)
Parliament
(Legislation) The Data Protection and Privacy Act, 2019 (NITA-U-PrivAct) (May 3, 2019)
Parliament
(Legislation) The Uganda National Health Research Organisation Act, 2011 (UNHRO-Act) (June 10, 2011)
Parliament
(Legislation) Uganda National Council for Science and Technology Act 1990 – Chapter 209 (UNCST-Act) (June 1, 1990)
Parliament
(Regulation) The Data Protection and Privacy Regulations, 2021 (NITA-U-PrivReg) (March 12, 2021)
National Information Technology Authority - Uganda
(Regulation) The National Drug Policy and Authority (Conduct of Clinical Trials) Regulations, 2024 (S.I. No. 29 of 2024) (NDPA-CTReg) (May 24, 2024)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) The National Drug Policy and Authority (Fees) (Amendment) Regulations, 2025 (NDPA-AmendFeesReg) (October 1, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) The National Drug Policy and Authority (Fees) Regulations, 2025 (NDPA-FeesReg) (Effective October 1, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) The National Drug Policy and Authority (Pharmacovigilance) (Amendment) Regulations, 2021 (NDPA-PVRegAmdt) (July 2, 2021)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) The National Drug Policy and Authority (Pharmacovigilance) Regulations, 2014 (S.I. 2014/37) (NDPA-PVReg) (March 28, 2014)
Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Guidelines for the Provision of Insurance Cover for Research Participants in Clinical Trials in Uganda (G-InsuranceCover) (Effective October 14, 2019)
National Drug Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines on Good Clinical Practice in the Conduct of Clinical Trials Involving Human Participants (Revisions No. 1) (G-TrialsGCP) (Effective October 14, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines on Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products - Annexes (Revision No. 4) (G-GMPAnnexes) (Effective July 10, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines on Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products Part I - Basic Requirements for Medicinal Products (Revision No. 5) (G-GMPMedicinal) (Effective July 10, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines on Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products Part II – Basic Requirements for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (Revision No. 2) (G-GMP-APIs) (Effective July 10, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines on the Conduct of Clinical Trials in Children, Pregnant and Lactating Women in Uganda (G-CTChldrnWmn) (Effective July 10, 2023)
National Drug Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines on the Conduct of Clinical Trials in Uganda (Revision No. 1) (G-CTConduct) (Effective October 14, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Guidance) Guidelines on the Verification of Applications for the Importation and Exportation of Drugs and Pharmaceutical Raw and Packaging Materials (Revision No. 1) (G-VerImprtExprt) (Effective September 6, 2023)
National Drug Authority
(Guidance) National Guidelines for Community Engagement in Research (NGCER) (February 2022)
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
(Guidance) National Guidelines for Research Involving Humans as Research Participants (NGHRP) (July 2014)
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
(Guidance) National Research Biobanking Guidelines (G-Biobank) (January 2021)
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
(Guidance) Registration Classification and Guidance Note for Application for Registration/Renewal of Registration (PDPO-Note) (Version 1.3) (December 2021)
Personal Data Protection Office
(Guidance) Research Registration and Clearance Policy and Guidelines (G-UNCSTreg) (July 2016)
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
(Circular) No. 009 - Certification of Premises Used to Supply Restricted Drugs within Institutions Conducting Clinical Trials (C-InstitutionCert) (February 27, 2018)
National Drug Authority
(Correspondence) Request to Review Templates for Materials Transfer Agreements and Data Sharing Agreements (UNCST-RevTemp) (April 19, 2021)
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
Additional Resources
(Article) PDPO Launches Toolkit to Empower Organizations Comply (UGA-43) (Date Unavailable)
Personal Data Protection Office
(Document) Format for Clinical Trial Protocol (UGA-12) (2024)
National Drug Authority
(Document) Format for Investigator’s Brochure (UGA-4) (Revision No. 1) (Effective September 19, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Document) Format of Clinical Trial Report (UGA-6) (Revision No. 1) (Effective September 19, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Document) Format of Report for Terminated Clinical Trial (UGA-5) (Revision No. 1) (Effective September 19, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Document) Labelling Investigational Drug Products for Clinical Trial (UGA-7) (2024)
National Drug Authority
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (UGA-3) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) Template: Annual Data Protection and Privacy Compliance Report to Personal Data Protection Office (PDPO) (UGA-41) (July 2023)
Personal Data Protection Office
(Document) The National Research Clearance Process (UGA-20) (Date Unavailable)
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (UGA-27) (October 22, 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (E3) (UGA-38) (Step 4 Version) (November 30, 1995)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with Makerere University (February 2022) (UGA-31)
(Webpage) Country Profile: Uganda (UGA-21) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) EA health Official East African Health Portal – Uganda National Health Research Organisation (UGA-42) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
East African Health Research Commission
(Webpage) National Drug Authority - Directorate of Product Safety (UGA-29) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
National Drug Authority
(Webpage) National Drug Authority – Clinical Trials (UGA-36) (Last Updated February 3, 2025)
National Drug Authority
(Webpage) National Drug Authority – Contact Us (UGA-23) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Webpage) National Drug Authority – Innovation & Research Desk (UGA-10) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Webpage) National Drug Authority – Service Delivery Timelines (UGA-24) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
National Drug Authority
(Webpage) National Drug Authority: Management Information System (NDAMIS) (UGA-34) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
National Drug Authority
(Webpage) National Research Information Management System (NRIMS) (UGA-33) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
(Webpage) NDA integrated Regulatory Information Management System (iRIMS) (UGA-40) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
National Drug Authority
(Webpage) Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (UGA-35) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
Pan African Clinical Trials Registry
(Webpage) Uganda National Council for Science and Technology – Contact Us (UGA-25) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
(Webpage) Uganda National Council for Science and Technology – Research Ethics Committee Accreditation (UGA-37) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
(Webpage) Uganda National Council for Science and Technology – Who We Are (UGA-30) (Current as of March 10, 2025)
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
Forms
(Form) Application for Additional Investigators, Change of Investigator or Additional Clinical Trial Sites (UGA-13) (2024)
National Drug Authority
(Form) Application Form for Amendment of Conditions of a Clinical Trial (UGA-19) (Revision No. 1) (Effective September 19, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Form) Application Form for REC Accreditation (UGA-9) (January 2022)
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
(Form) Application Form for Renewal of Authorisation of Clinical Trial (UGA-32) (Revision No. 1) (Effective September 19, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Form) CIOMS Form I (UGA-8) (Date Unavailable)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(Form) CTA Amendments Screening Form (UGA-22) (Revision No. 3) (Effective September 19, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Form) CTA Screening Renewal Form (UGA-2) (Revision No. 1) (Effective September 19, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Form) Declaration by Monitor (UGA-17) (Date Unavailable)
National Drug Authority
(Form) Declaration by Principal Investigator (UGA-16) (2024)
National Drug Authority
(Form) Declaration by Sponsor and Principal Investigator of Funds of the Clinical Trial (UGA-15) (2024)
National Drug Authority
(Form) Format of the Clinical Trial Application Form (CTA) (UGA-39) (Revision No. 1) (Effective September 19, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Form) Initial CTA Screening Checklist (UGA-1) (Rev No. 3) (Effective September 19, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Form) Letter of Authorization from Holder of Patent of Drug, Licensed Person or Manufacturer of Drug (UGA-18) (Revision No. 1) (Effective September 19, 2024)
National Drug Authority
(Form) Pharmaceutical Data on Dosage Form (UGA-14) (2024)
National Drug Authority
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 
Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

United Kingdom
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
This message was updated on January 13, 2026
Information Not Yet Incorporated Into Country Profile:

New Clinical Trials Regulations and Related Guidance

The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 will come into force on April 28, 2026. For more information, see the Health Research Authority (HRA) clinical trials regulations reform webpage.

To support the implementation of the new regulations, the HRA published Guidance on changes to the clinical trials regulations and the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) continues to issue draft guidance, effective April 28, 2026. See the MHRA's Clinical Trials Hub page for the latest list of guidance documents.

Updated IRAS Combined Review Guide

On October 31, 2025, the HRA updated the Step by step guide to using IRAS for combined review. This information is also available in a new and easy-to-use format, the IRAS User Guide.

Updated Commercial Model Agreements

In July 2025, the commercial model agreements for use with participating National Health Service (NHS) and Health and Social Care (HSC) organizations were updated to align with the June 2025 model Commercial Chief Investigator Agreements. Starting October 1, 2025, only the July 2025 versions of the agreements, which can be found on IRAS Help, will be accepted in new Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) submissions. For more information, see the Health Research Authority news update.

Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency

As per the MHCTR and the MHCTR2006, the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial approvals, oversight, and inspections in the United Kingdom (UK). The MHRA grants permission for clinical trials to be conducted in the UK in accordance with the MHCTR and the MHCTR2006.

MHRA-More states that MHRA regulates medicines, including vaccines, supplied in the UK, spanning the whole of a medicine’s lifecycle. MHRA decides whether medicines should be granted licenses (i.e., marketing authorizations) and whether licenses can be varied. These decisions are based on safety, quality, and effectiveness data submitted. Further, MHRA conducts several regulatory activities including the following:

Inspecting facilities that manufacture and carry out safety tests on medicines to ensure they comply with Good Manufacturing Practice and Good Laboratory Practice standards
Approving UK-based clinical trials and inspecting them to ensure they comply with Good Clinical Practice standards
Carrying out vital research to support the development of new biological medicines and vaccines
Developing reference materials for biological medicines to ensure their quality can be assessed in a standard way
Monitoring the safety of the medicine while on the market, for example by actively assessing post-market safety reports
Reclassifying existing medicines, if there is evidence to safely support doing so
Regulating the importation of licensed medicines to the UK from European Union countries
Carrying out inspections to ensure that medicines are developed, manufactured, distributed, and monitored to internationally recognized standards
Helping set and enforce the legal advertising regulations for medicines in the UK
Independent quality testing of batches of biological medicines before they go onto the market to make sure that it is consistent with batches previously shown to be safe and effective
Regulating the supply of unlicensed medicines into the UK
Carrying out enforcement activities to prevent the illegal supply of unlicensed medicines, to or within the UK
In addition, according to GBR-57, MHRA’s responsibilities are to:

Ensure that medicines, medical devices, and blood components for transfusion meet applicable standards of safety, quality, and efficacy
Ensure that the supply chain for medicines, medical devices, and blood components is safe and secure
Promote international standardization and harmonization to assure the effectiveness and safety of biological medicines
Help to educate the public and healthcare professionals about the risks and benefits of medicines, medical devices, and blood components
Enable innovation and research and development that is beneficial to public health
Collaborate with partners in the UK and internationally to enable the earliest access to safe medicines and medical devices and to protect public health
Per the G-CTAuth-GBR, the agency’s Clinical Trials Unit (CTU) focuses specifically on reviewing applications to conduct clinical trials of medicinal products. For a listing of MHRA services and information, see GBR-36.

G-ATMP states that MHRA is also the competent authority for advanced therapy medicinal products (ATMPs) and for UK manufacturers or importers of ATMPs. An ATMP is a medicinal product which is either a gene therapy medicinal product, a somatic cell therapy medicinal product, or a tissue engineered product.

Pursuant to the MMDAct, the Secretary of State for the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) is authorized to make clinical trials regulations and amend or supplement the law relating to human medicines, taking into consideration the safety of human medicines, the availability of human medicines, and the likelihood of the UK being seen as a favorable place to carry out research relating to human medicines, conduct clinical trials, or manufacture or supply human medicines.

Other Considerations

As indicated in GBR-74, the UK has promulgated new regulations for running clinical trials (MHCTR2024). There is a 12-month implementation period before the amended regulations come fully into force in April 2026. During the transition, the Health Research Authority (HRA) and MHRA will support the transition by publishing new guidance, hosting training, and offering opportunities to shape transparency requirements. The MHCTR-Chgs summarizes the latest guidance developed on how to submit, manage, and conduct clinical trials of investigational medicinal products (CTIMPs) in compliance with the new regulation. When the new regulations do come into force, they will apply across all four nations of the UK (England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland). All clinical trials taking place in the UK will be required to comply with the updated regulations. (ClinRegs will monitor these resources and update the profile as appropriate.) See GBR-74 for more information.

Per GBR-44, the UK is a member of the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). GBR-45 indicates that the UK implemented the ICH’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113) in 2016. See GBR-80 for the current ICH guidelines that have been implemented by MHRA.

Please note: The UK is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (GBR-5), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see GBR-48.

Contact Information

Per GBR-58, the following is the MHRA’s contact information:

Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
10 South Colonnade
Canary Wharf
London E14 4PU
United Kingdom

Main Phone: +44 020 3080 6000
General Email: info@mhra.gov.uk
Data Protection Email: DataProtection@mhra.gov.uk
Importing or Exporting Investigational Medical Products Email: for queries, complete the GMP contact form and email it to gmpinspectorate@mhra.gov.uk

Clinical Trials of Medicines:
Email: clintrialhelpline@mhra.gov.uk
Phone: +44 020 3080 6456

See GBR-58 for additional MHRA contact information. Further, the G-CTAuth-GBR includes other email addresses for specific purposes related to submissions.

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile) 

The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 was signed into law in April 2025 and will come into force on April 28, 2026, after a 12-month implementation period. See HRA’s Guidance on changes to the clinical trials regulations and MHRA’s draft guidance to support sponsors in preparing for the implementation of the new regulations.
On October 31, 2025, the Health Research Authority (HRA) updated G-IRASCombRev. This information is also available in a new and easy-to-use format, the IRAS User Guide. 
Overview

In accordance with the MHCTR and the MHCTR2006, the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) is responsible for reviewing, evaluating, and approving applications for clinical trials using registered or unregistered investigational products (IPs). (Note: IPs are known as investigational medicinal products (IMPs) in the United Kingdom (UK)). The G-CTApp specifies that the scope of the MHRA’s assessment includes all clinical trials (Phases 1-4). Per G-CTApp and G-IRASCombRev, all new clinical trial applications must be prepared, submitted, and reviewed via the combined review process, which offers a single application route and parallel/coordinated review from MHRA and the ethics committee (EC) leading to a single UK decision for clinical trials.

Per the G-Biosimilars, MHRA also regulates the licensing of biosimilars (i.e., similar biological medicinal products).

Clinical Trial Review Process

Per GBR-72, under combined review for clinical trials of investigational medicinal products (CTIMPs), research teams make a single application using a new part (GBR-125) of the Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) (GBR-78), which goes to both the MHRA and an EC at the same time. As indicated in the G-IRASCombRev, the application will be validated within three (3) days of being received with the validation status posted in the dashboard. During validation, the system will check whether all the required documents have been submitted, can be opened, and are readable. If an application is invalidated, an option will be available to resend the application. During the technical review, the reviewing organization can raise a ‘Request for Further Information’ (RFI) in which they request that the applicant provide additional information or clarification within 14 days. RFIs will be sent as a task to the user who initially submitted the application. To formally request an extension to respond to an RFI, the applicant should email the MHRA at clintrialhelpline@mhra.gov.uk advising how much time is needed. A final decision will be issued 10 days after the response has been received. An RFI extension will affect overall review timelines. Should the assessors have further queries following the response to the RFI, these will be made as a request for clarification in the 'My Tasks' - 'My Personal Tasks' section of the applicant’s IRAS account. Applicants should submit documents via IRAS if needed for clarifications. See G-IRASCombRev for additional details on the review process, as well as how to withdraw an application.

GBR-72 states that the regulatory and ethics reviews are done in parallel and any requests for further information are raised jointly. A single response to these requests leads to a single decision from both reviews. The G-CTApp states that the initial combined review assessment will be completed within 30 days of application submission. Applications for healthy volunteer trials and sponsor-determined phase 1 trials in non-oncology participants may qualify for a shortened assessment time and the MHRA will work with the EC to expedite these applications. When applications need expert advice, the MHRA will seek advice from the Clinical Trials, Biologicals and Vaccines Expert Advisory Group (CTBV EAG) of the Commission on Human Medicines (CHM). In addition, the CHM will then discuss the trial at their meeting, which will take place later in the same week as the CTBV EAG meeting. See the G-CTApp for examples of which trials require expert advice and for detailed requirements.

Per the G-CTApp, the MHRA also supports the conduct of trials with complex innovative designs such as umbrella, basket, platform, and master protocol plus submodules. These trial designs are characterized by the presence of prospective major adaptations, such as the addition of new IPs or introducing new trial populations. Before submitting a clinical trial application with a complex innovative design and/or an amendment requesting approval of major adaptations, sponsors are recommended to establish a dialogue with the MHRA and seek advice.

The G-CTApp states that under the combined review process, the MHRA will inform applicants of the outcome of the submission along with the EC’s review and decision. The outcomes could be one (1) of the following:

Acceptance of the request for a clinical trial authorization
Acceptance of the request for a clinical trial authorization subject to conditions
Grounds for non-acceptance of the request for a clinical trial authorization
As indicated in the G-CTApp, with respect to grounds for non-acceptance, applicants will have the opportunity to respond, usually within 14 days; however, this may be extended on request. A communication informing the applicant of the combined MHRA and EC decision will usually be sent within 60 days of receiving the original valid application. If an extension to the response date has been agreed to, then this will impact the final decision timeline. Notification of a decision relating to a gene therapy product, somatic cell therapy (including xenogenic cell therapy) product, tissue engineered product, or products containing genetically modified organisms will be sent within 90 days of receiving the original application, unless otherwise advised. Communications will be sent electronically via email from MHRA_CT_Ecomms@mhra.gov.uk. The MHRA will only send official correspondence to the named applicant email address. According to the MHCTR, if the sponsor or the designated representative does not receive a request for additional information from the MHRA within 30 days, the application is considered authorized. (See the Timeline of Review section for additional details.)

As stated in G-CTApp, GBR-125 continues to support the trial through amendments right up to the end of the trial.

Per GBR-9, the EC’s ethical opinion applies for the duration of the study, which was stated in the clinical trial application and protocol. An extension of the study period is not in itself a substantial amendment, except where it is related to other amendments that would be substantial, such as an increase in target recruitment, addition of new procedures or sub-studies, or extension of follow-up. Where the duration of the study is to be extended beyond the period specified in the application form, the EC should be notified.

As described in GBR-18, MHRA is authorized to inspect CTIMPs conducted by both commercial and non-commercial organizations. The MHRA Inspectors assess whether the organization sponsoring and/or conducting CTIMPs have systems in place to meet the requirements of the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, GBR-92, and the G-GMP-GDP. MHRA follows a risk-based approach to inspections. Once an inspection has been completed, a formal report outlining the findings will be sent to the inspected organization.

In addition to managing CTIMP applications, IRAS (GBR-78) also serves as the single system to apply for the permissions and approvals for health and social care/community care research in the UK. It generates the IRAS ID and uses filters to ensure that the data collected and collated is appropriate to the type of study, and consequently the permissions and approvals required. The system helps applicants meet the regulatory and governance requirements. As described in GBR-67, approval from the Health Research Authority (HRA) is required for all National Health Service (NHS) project-based research led from England or Wales. HRA and Health and Care Research Wales (HCRW) approval brings together the assessment of governance and legal compliance. If a project is led from Northern Ireland or Scotland and involves NHS sites, then applications should be made through the appropriate NHS permission process for that lead nation. Studies with sites in Northern Ireland or Scotland are supported through existing UK-wide compatibility systems where each country accepts relevant centralized assurances from national coordinating functions to avoid duplication. For details on HRA’s assessment criteria and standards for approval, see GBR-29.

UK-wide Research

The UKwide-Rsrch specifies that the four (4) UK nations take a consistent approach to study-wide reviews with one (1) application for all relevant UK sites. Each UK nation will take assurances from the study-wide review conducted by the lead nation (the nation conducting the initial review). The following outlines key differences in approvals from UK nations:

England and Wales – For any research taking place in England and/or Wales, the sponsor will receive an HRA and HCRW approval letter, which will detail any further requirements before beginning the research
Northern Ireland – Each participating Northern Ireland Health and Social Care body will confirm their capacity and capability after the relevant study-wide reviews and participating site assessments and arrangements are complete
Scotland – For any research taking place in Scotland, the sponsor will receive Research & Development permission after the relevant study-wide reviews and site assessments and arrangements are complete
Notification Scheme

Per the G-CTApp, MHRA’s notification scheme enables a more streamlined and risk-proportionate approach to processing clinical trial authorization for “initial” applications. The scheme only applies to clinical trial applications for Phase 4 and certain Phase 3 clinical trials deemed to be of lower risk. Interest in the notification scheme should be registered via the combined review process described above (GBR-125). MHRA acceptance of an application under the notification scheme will be confirmed within 14 calendar days from the application received effective date and authorization by the MHRA will be granted unless any criterion is not suitably met. If the MHRA determines the application does not meet the notification scheme criteria, an objection decision will be communicated within 14 calendar days from the application received effective date, and the application will continue under full clinical trial assessment with a decision communicated within the 30-day statutory timeframe.

As indicated in the G-CTApp, the notification scheme acceptance criteria are as follows:

Phase 4 trials must meet both of the following criteria:

All IPs are licensed and used according to the relevant UK, United States of America (USA), or European Union (EU) marketing authorization (except for placebo)
There are no ongoing safety concerns with the IP(s) that the sponsor is aware of, for example other trials on temporary halt/clinical hold, other trials with unresolved urgent safety measures or post-marketing regulatory restrictions
Phase 3 trials must meet at least one (1) of the following criteria:

The trial is already approved in the USA or EU based on the same protocol and Investigator’s Brochure (IB) versions submitted to MHRA, and for EU approvals, the same version of the IP dossier. For trials approved in the USA only, the IP dossier submitted to the MHRA must document the same IP manufacturing process
The MHRA has approved in the last two (2) years a previous Phase 3 clinical trial of the IP(s) at the same dose (or a higher dose), dosing frequency (or a higher frequency) and route of administration, and for the same indication (even if the trial was with a different sponsor) and utilizing the same manufacturing process
IPs are licensed and used according to the relevant UK, USA, or EU marketing authorization (except for placebo)
In addition, the G-CTApp states that to be eligible for the scheme, a Phase 3 trial must not include any of the following:

Complex, innovative trial design (e.g., basket, umbrella, and platform) that allows for prospective major adaptations such as the addition of indications or IPs via future amendments
Includes pediatric participants
Includes pregnant or breastfeeding participants
IP is first in class
IP is an advanced therapy medicinal product (ATMP)
Alignment with the European Union

GBR-115 indicates that the UK is committed to being as aligned as possible with the EU Clinical Trials Regulation (GBR-21). The MMDAct grants authority for regulations to be made that correspond or are similar to GBR-21. For more information about GBR-21, see GBR-54.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency

As per the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, and the G-CTApp, the sponsor or the designated representative is responsible for paying a fee to the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) to submit a clinical trial application for authorization. According to the G-MHRAPaymt, applicants will receive an invoice to make a payment for the outstanding amount after validation of the application. Applicants must pay invoices upon receipt or they will incur penalty fees. Non-payment may also result in suspension of any license or authorization, followed by legal proceedings for any unpaid amounts.

As delineated in the G-MHRAFees, the MHRA levies the following clinical trial processing fees:

4,656 British Pounds – Applications with an Investigational Medicinal Product (IMP) dossier (higher fee for phase 1, full and simplified IMP dossier)
343 British Pounds – Applications without an IMP dossier (lower fee for phase IV, cross referral, additional protocol)
343 British Pounds – Clinical trial variation/amendment
No cost – Phase IV notification
343 British Pounds – Assessment of annual safety reports
Note per the G-MHRAFees, there is no annual clinical trials fee and no fee for Phase IV notifications. For a cross-referral or additional protocol submission, no new IMP dossier or investigators brochure data should be provided; however, copies of the relevant manufacturer’s authorization(s) and qualified person declaration (if applicable) should be provided since these are study specific.

Per the G-CTAuth-GBR, there are fees for annual development safety update reports (DSURs) (which have replaced annual progress reports). For more information, contact DSURfees@mhra.gov.uk. See the G-CTAuth-GBR for additional details including the user manual.

The G-CTApp further indicates that no fees are required for applications submitted and authorized under the Notification Scheme.

Payment Instructions

According to the G-MHRAPaymt, the MHRA does not accept checks. Payments can be made electronically by bank transfer, credit card, or debit card. The relevant invoice and customer number should be quoted when making payments. Bank transfers should be sent to:

Account Name: MHRA
Account Number: 10004386
Sort code: 60-70-80
Swift code: NWBKGB2L
IBAN: GB68NWBK60708010004386
Bank: National Westminster Bank

Bank address:
National Westminster Bank RBS
London Corporate Service Centre, 2nd Floor
280 Bishopsgate
London
EC2M 4RB
UK

As per G-MHRAPaymt, credit or debit card payments may be made securely online using GBR-26. Remittance advice notices can be sent to sales.invoices@mhra.gov.uk and should include the relevant invoice number on the remittance advice. MHRA cannot accept any documentation sent by postal mail service. Further information can be obtained by emailing sales.invoices@mhra.gov.uk. G-MHRAPaymt further provides that clinical trial application invoice disputes/queries should be emailed to ctdhelpline@mhra.gov.uk and cc: sales.invoices@mhra.gov.uk.

The G-CTApp indicates that invoices for clinical trial authorization applications and substantial amendment applications are sent directly to the applicant shortly after a valid submission has been established. The applicant’s cover letter should clearly highlight the purchase order (PO) number where available. It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure timely payment of invoices for their submissions. Invoices must be settled on receipt of invoice. For additional information, applicants may contact the MHRA Finance Department at 020 3080 6533 or sales.invoices@mhra.gov.uk.

Per the G-CTAuth-GBR, the fees for annual DSURs will only be accepted by MHRA via its dedicated DSUR payments page (GBR-43) prior to submission of a DSUR. Receipts generated will be sent by email and must be included in the report submission as proof of payment in its original format as a standalone document, along with the cover letter and DSUR. Failure to provide evidence of payment will result in the submission being made invalid and sponsors should update their trial master file of this non-compliancy, with corrective and preventative actions to address it.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Overview

As set forth in GAfREC, the United Kingdom (UK) has a centralized recognition process for ethics committees (ECs), known as research ethics committees (RECs) in the UK. ECs are part of an accountable and independent Research Ethics Service (RES) (GBR-62).

As described in GBR-51 and GBR-62, the RES has a dual mission to protect the rights, safety, dignity, and well-being of research participants and to facilitate and promote ethical research that is of potential benefit to participants, science, and society. To achieve this, GBR-62 states that the RES works with the devolved administrations to conduct the following activities:

Provide robust, proportionate, and responsive ethical review of research through ECs
Provide ethical guidance to ECs
Provide and deliver a managed structure to support ECs
Deliver a quality assurance (QA) framework
Deliver a training program
Work with colleagues across the UK to maintain a UK-wide framework for ethical review
Work with colleagues in the wider regulatory environment to streamline the processes for approving research
Promote and support transparency in research
As stated in GAfREC, the RES encompasses England’s Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC), Northern Ireland’s Department of Health, the Scottish Government Health and Social Care Finance Directorate, the Welsh Government’s Department of Health and Social Care as well as the ECs that are collectively recognized or established by these authorizing bodies. The UK Health Departments have authorized the head office of the RES in England, within the Health Research Authority (HRA), to perform some UK-wide functions on behalf of the other head offices, including performing some of the functions of the UK Ethics Committee Authority (UKECA), which is the statutory body that recognizes ECs for the review of clinical trials of investigational medicinal products (CTIMPs). (See Oversight of Ethics Committees section for more details on RES and UKECA functions.) In accordance with the MHCTR and the MHCTR2006, ECs recognized to conduct reviews of clinical trials for CTIMPs are authorized by the UKECA. The UKwide-Rsrch reaffirms that GAfREC is the UK policy document governing the RES function and EC reviews in each country.

All recognized RES ECs are required to comply with the provisions delineated in GAfREC, the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), and GBR-9. However, specific ECs within the RES are recognized, or otherwise designated, to review certain types of research proposals. A list of recognized ECs within the RES is available through GBR-111. Also see GBR-64 for EC definitions.

Ethics Committee Composition

As delineated in the MHCTR and GAfREC, a RES-recognized EC, which includes those recognized by UKECA, may consist of up to 18 members. Collectively, members must encompass the qualifications and experience required to review and evaluate the scientific, medical, and ethical aspects of a proposed clinical trial. The ECs should include a diverse mixture of members in terms of age, disability, gender, race, religion, and sexual orientation. One third of the committee must also be lay members, and half of the lay members must be persons who are not and never have been health care professionals, clinical researchers, or managers of clinical research (also known as lay members). Additionally, GAfREC states that a quorate meeting must be attended by at least seven (7) members and include the chair, at least one (1) expert member, and one (1) lay member. GBR-9 mirrors this requirement, but adds that when investigational products are reviewed, a lay member must be present. See GBR-113 for additional recommendations for composition.

Per GBR-9, in order to accommodate the United States’ (US) quorum definition pursuant to regulations for the protection of human subjects in research (45 CFR 46) and the Common Rule (45 CFR 46 Subpart A), the RES also makes special arrangements to review UK-based research funded by US Federal Government departments and their agencies. In such cases, the quorum is a majority of the EC. See the ClinRegs United States page, Ethics Committee topic for more information on ethics review requirements in the US.

As indicated in GAfREC, committee member appointments are valid for up to five (5) years. Appointments may be renewed; however, members should not normally serve more than two (2) consecutive terms of five (5) years on the same EC, and members may resign at any time. Members must maintain confidentiality regarding all ethical review related matters and refuse any projects in which they have a conflict of interest. See the MHCTR and GAfREC for additional EC composition requirements.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

In addition to complying with composition requirements, GAfREC, GBR-113, and GBR-9 state that an EC must also adopt written standard operating procedures (SOPs). The SOPs should cover the entire review process from application submission to opinion and notification, amendments, and annual reporting.

Per GBR-9, applications that have been submitted via the CTIMP combined review service will be validated by the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), and EC staff do not need to undertake a formal validation check. ECs should check the application against the validation checklist and request any missing information or clarifications from the applicant, if required. All validated clinical trial applications for an ethical opinion should be reviewed at a full meeting of an EC. An EC should normally hold at least 10 scheduled full meetings in each year for the purpose of ethical review of applications. Additional meetings may be held where necessary to ensure that an ethical opinion on an application is given within the relevant time limit (or to discuss matters relating to the establishment or operating procedures of the EC or for training purposes). Meetings to review applications should normally be held at intervals of one (1) month unless there are holidays. The schedule of EC meetings for the financial year commencing on April 1st should be agreed to by December 1st in the previous financial year. The schedule should set out the dates and times of meetings, and the closing date for applications for each meeting. All members and deputy members of the EC should receive details of the schedule. The closing dates for full applications should normally be 14 calendar days prior to each EC meeting. In the case of applications for Phase 1 clinical trials in healthy volunteers, ECs may adopt a later closing date for applications not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the meeting and may accept applications booked in advance of the closing date which are submitted up to seven (7) days before the date of the meeting.

According to GBR-9, the EC Chair is responsible for ensuring that the EC reaches clearly agreed to decisions on all matters. If the Chair is unavailable, then the meeting should normally be chaired by the vice-Chair or, if the vice Chair is also unavailable, by the alternate vice-Chair. The EC meeting should reach unanimous decisions by consensus wherever possible. Where a consensus is not achievable, a formal vote should be taken by a counting of hands. The decision of the EC should be determined by a simple majority of those members present and entitled to vote. A record should be kept of the number of votes, including abstentions, in the minutes. Where the vote is tied, the Chair may give a casting vote, but should first consider any other options to arrive at a more consensual decision. Where any member wishes to record a formal dissent from the decision of the committee, this should be recorded in the minutes but should not be included in the opinion letter. An agenda should be prepared for an EC meeting and EC staff must prepare minutes of the EC meetings. See GBR-9 for additional requirements on the agenda, meeting conduct/decisions, and minutes during full EC meetings.

As per GBR-9, documents for EC meetings should be made available as soon as possible after the agenda is finalized and applications have been validated, and in any case no later than 10 calendar days prior to the meeting (with the exception of expedited, proportionate review, and Phase 1 applications where there has been prior agreement). Under no circumstances should full applications be tabled at the meeting. Applications should be made available to members via the HRA Assessment and Review Portal (HARP) as soon as the application is validated, and an email sent to the EC members to inform them the application is now viewable.

GBR-9 requires ECs to retain all the documentation relating to a CTIMP on which it gives an opinion:

Where the trial proceeds, for at least three (3) years from the conclusion or early termination of the trial
Where the trial does not proceed (e.g., it is given an unfavorable opinion, or does not start following a favorable opinion), for at least three (3) years from the date of the opinion
In accordance with GBR-9, documentation should be retained on all invalid applications for at least one (1) year from the date of invalidation; and for three (3) years where the application is withdrawn by the EC, the chief investigator, or the sponsor after the EC review but before a final opinion is given. Signed final copies of the minutes of full EC meetings and sub-committee business should be retained electronically for at least 20 years. Electronic records of studies will be retained indefinitely.

For detailed EC procedures and information on other administrative processes, see GAfREC, GBR-113, and GBR-9.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile) 

The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 was signed into law in April 2025 and will come into force on April 28, 2026, after a 12-month implementation period. See HRA’s Guidance on changes to the clinical trials regulations and MHRA’s draft guidance to support sponsors in preparing for the implementation of the new regulations.

Overview

According to GAfREC, the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), and GBR-9, the primary scope of information assessed by ethics committees (ECs) within the United Kingdom (UK) Health Departments’ Research Ethics Service (RES) (GBR-62) relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial. (Note: ECs are known as research ethics committees (RECs) in the UK). GAfREC specifies that ethical review is required for research proposals that involve investigational products (IPs), material consisting of human cells, and other situations that are described in GAfREC.

As per GAfREC, the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, the MHCTR2006-No2, and GBR-113, ECs must pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable. (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations). In addition, per GBR-46, the ethical review process should evaluate how the study involves the public in research, especially at the design stage (e.g., the participant information sheets).

As indicated in GAfREC, the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, GBR-113, and GBR-9, ECs are responsible for ensuring an independent, timely, and competent review of all ethical aspects of the clinical trial protocol. They must act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved by evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants; confirming the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, and methods; and verifying the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards. See GAfREC, the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, and GBR-9 for detailed ethics review guidelines.

GBR-112 indicates that certain ECs are flagged for special expertise including gene therapy or stem cell clinical trials; Phase 1 studies in healthy volunteers; Phase 1 studies in participants; research involving adults lacking capacity; research involving children; research involving prisoners or prisons; or fast-track ECs.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

As described in GBR-9, GBR-66, and GBR-95, the type of EC responsible for approval (known as a “favorable opinion” in the UK) within the RES depends on the type of research being conducted. Per GAfREC and GBR-9, ECs are recognized or established by the United Kingdom Ethics Committee Authority (UKECA) to conduct reviews of clinical trials for IPs (known as clinical trials for investigational medicinal products (CTIMPs) in the UK). Per GAfREC, RES-recognized ECs established under Health Department policy within each of the four (4) UK nations (England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales) review research studies other than IP clinical trials. Also see GBR-64 for definitions of EC terminology and GBR-111 and GBR-112 to search for ECs within the RES.

As indicated in the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, and GAfREC, IP applications require the favorable opinion of a UKECA-recognized EC, and approval by the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) prior to the sponsor or the designated legal representative initiating the trial. The G-CTApp states that all new clinical trial applications must be prepared, submitted, and reviewed via the combined review process, wherein a single application route and coordinated review by MHRA and the EC leads to a single UK decision. New clinical trial applications for combined review are prepared and electronically submitted to the new combined review section of Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) (GBR-125). Per GBR-78, IRAS does not change the requirements for review, including authorizations or signatures, of any regulatory authority or National Health Service (NHS) body. Therefore, it requires different authorizations depending on the type of study and the applicable review bodies. According to GBR-9, submissions of the electronic application must be made to IRAS on the same day that a booking is made to schedule an EC review through the NHS REC’s Online Booking Service (GBR-95).

According to the MHCTR, GAfREC, and GBR-9, for all studies, only one (1) EC review is needed for a project taking place in the UK, regardless of the number of sites. Furthermore, GBR-9 states that the Chief Investigator (CI) should be based in the UK and that the REC may agree exceptionally to an application being submitted by a CI based outside the UK, but should consider as part of the ethical review whether adequate arrangements are in place for supervision of the study in the UK. The ethical review includes an assessment of the suitability of each site or sites at which the research is to be conducted in the UK. The site assessment is not a separate ethical review, but forms part of the single ethical review of the research. Management permission is still required from the organization responsible for hosting the research before it commences at any site. In the case of international studies, an application must be made to an EC in the UK, whether or not the study has a favorable ethical opinion from a committee outside the UK, and whether or not it has started outside the UK.

Per GBR-68, unless an application is being processed under the proportionate review service, the applicant should attend the EC meeting if possible. The EC will notify the sponsor of its initial/provisional decision, usually within 10 working days of the EC meeting. GBR-9 indicates that the EC should reach one (1) of the following decisions on any application reviewed at a full meeting or a proportionate review sub-committee meeting:

A final opinion, which may be either favorable with standard conditions, favorable with additional conditions, or unfavorable
Provisional opinion with request for further information, which means the EC may decide that a final opinion cannot be issued until further information or clarification has been received from the applicant
The MHCTR, GBR-9, and GBR-68 state that the EC must give its final opinion within 60 calendar days of receipt of a valid application. When an EC requires further information before confirming its opinion, it may give a provisional opinion and may make one (1) written request for further information, clarification, or changes to documentation. The time required for the EC to receive a complete response to its request does not count against the 60-day timeline. Certain studies, including gene therapy studies, will take 90 days, or 180 days if a specialist group or committee is consulted. For other exceptions, see GAfREC and the MHCTR. (See the Submission Process and Timeline of Review sections for detailed submission process requirements.)

Per GBR-116, the Health Research Authority (HRA), on behalf of the UK, offers a fast-track research ethics review. Fast-track ethics review is open to global clinical trials and Phase 1 trials, whether the sponsor is commercial or non-commercial. This includes:

Any CTIMP led from the UK with at least one (1) other country participating
Any CTIMP led from outside the UK which could be placed in any country and the UK is competing for participation (including any only taking place in the UK)
Any Phase 1 or Phase 1/2 CTIMP in healthy volunteers or participants
Fast-track ethics review is not available for any CTIMP involving a gene therapy medicinal product, any CTIMP funded by the US Department of Health and Human Services, and any other type of clinical trial or research study.

Per the CTIMP-Condtns and GBR-9, the EC’s favorable ethical opinion applies for the stated duration of the study, except where action is taken to suspend or terminate the opinion. The MHCTR, GAfREC, and IRAS (GBR-78) require the applicant to identify an expected end date for the study. A change to the definition of the end of the study is a substantial amendment. Extension of the study beyond the period specified in the application form is a non-substantial amendment. As stated in the CTIMP-Condtns, where the duration of the study is to be extended beyond the period specified in the application form, there is no need to notify or seek approval from the EC.

GBR-9 describes EC processes related to reviewing and approving clinical trial amendments and any related notifications. The sponsor of a CTIMP may make an amendment to a clinical trial authorization, other than a substantial amendment, at any time after the trial has started. It is not necessary to notify MHRA or the EC about unsubstantial amendments. If the amendment is substantial, the sponsor is required to submit a valid amendment to the MHRA and/or the REC that gave the favorable opinion of the trial. Where the sponsor requests an ethical opinion on a CTIMP, the EC should provide this in all cases within 35 calendar days of receiving a valid amendment. If the opinion is unfavorable, the sponsor may then modify the proposed amendment. A written notice of the modification should be sent to the EC at least 14 calendar days before it is due to be implemented. The EC may then give an unfavorable opinion on the modified amendment within 14 calendar days, otherwise it may be implemented. See GBR-9 and GBR-98 for guidance on what changes qualify as a substantial amendment, which requires notification to the EC and MHRA. GBR-9 states that while the EC is not responsible for proactive monitoring, it has a duty to keep the favorable ethical opinion under review in the light of any significant developments and may review the opinion at any time. If information raises concerns about the suitability of the site or investigator, the favorable opinion may be reviewed.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 9, 2025
As set forth in GAfREC, ethics committees (ECs) are not permitted to charge an application fee or seek any other financial contribution or donation for reviewing research proposals. Additionally, EC members receive no payment for contributing to the application review process at scheduled meetings or for attending these meetings.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Overview

As stated in GAfREC and GBR-9, the United Kingdom (UK)-wide Research Ethics Service (RES) (GBR-62) provides proportionate and responsive ethical review of research through its “recognized” ethics committees (ECs), known as research ethics committees (RECs) in the UK. Per the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, and GAfREC, the UK Ethics Committee Authority (UKECA) is the statutory body that recognizes ECs for the review of clinical trials of investigational products (CTIMPs). The UK Health Departments have authorized England’s Health Research Authority (HRA) to perform some of the RES functions (more details below).

As indicated in GBR-9, the UKECA recognizes ECs for new CTIMPs:

Phase 1 trial in healthy volunteers (including patients without the target disease or condition) – Any recognized EC
Phase 1/2a trial in both healthy volunteers and patients with the target disease or condition – Any recognized National Health System (NHS) EC
Phase 2a trials – Any recognized NHS EC
Trial of medicinal products for gene therapy – Gene Therapy Advisory Committee (GTAC) and ECs which are recognized to review gene therapy trials
Trial of Advanced Therapy Medicinal Product – GTAC and ECs which are recognized to review gene therapy trials; all studies that have been submitted to the Expert Advisory Group (who provide advice on complex applications), must be reviewed by an EC which is flagged to review stem cell therapy studies
All other CTIMPs in patients – Any recognized NHS EC
As stated in GAfREC, the HRA performs the following EC oversight activities on behalf of the UKECA:

Develops and manages a national training program for ECs
Develops, implements, and maintains standard operating procedures (SOPs) for ECs and provides advice and support to ECs on procedural issues
Develops a quality assurance program, including accreditation of ECs, based on regular monitoring and audit of their operation and performance
Provides guidance and advice to assist ECs in their work and encourage consistency of approach to common issues in research ethics
Acts for UKECA to provide a national mechanism for operational advice and assistance to ECs recognized to review and approve clinical trials
Acts for UKECA to handle appeals against the unfavorable opinions of ECs in respect of CTIMPs
Acts for UKECA to transfer to a successor EC the functions of an EC that has ceased to operate or that has been varied, abolished, or had its recognition revoked
Acts for UKECA to reallocate to ECs applications made to the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee which do not require its review
Further, per GAfREC, the following oversight functions are the responsibility of UKECA for the purposes of clinical trials:

Establishes or recognizes ECs
Establishes or recognizes ECs to act in relation to such descriptions or classes of research as it considers appropriate
Abolishes or revokes the recognition of ECs that it has established or recognized
Monitors the extent to which ECs adequately perform their functions, including through annual reports from ECs it has recognized
Approves standing orders and SOPs for EC business and operations, as well as variations and revocations to these orders and procedures
Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

Per GAfREC, HRA, acting for UKECA, develops a quality assurance program to encourage a consistently high level of service to applicants, including accreditation of ECs, based on regular monitoring and audit of their operation and performance.

GBR-123 indicates that HRA implements a rolling accreditation program to audit UK ECs against standards as detailed in GAfREC and GBR-9. ECs are issued with an audit decision: full accreditation, accreditation with conditions (low-risk non-compliance identified requiring an action plan), or provisional accreditation (high- and low-risk issues requiring an action plan). Published bi-annually, HRA’s latest accreditation report is at GBR-124. In addition, quality control checks are undertaken, and results are shared with management teams. For example, operational managers observe EC meetings and provide a check against agreed-upon standards relating to meeting conduct and minute taking. Findings from the meeting observations are shared with the EC chair and staff and collated to identify common themes to inform improvements. For more information about quality assurance, contact quality.assurance@hra.nhs.uk.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile) 

The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 was signed into law in April 2025 and will come into force on April 28, 2026, after a 12-month implementation period. See HRA’s Guidance on changes to the clinical trials regulations and MHRA’s draft guidance to support sponsors in preparing for the implementation of the new regulations.
On October 31, 2025, the Health Research Authority (HRA) updated G-IRASCombRev. This information is also available in a new and easy-to-use format, the IRAS User Guide. 
Overview

In accordance with the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, the G-CTApp, and GBR-9, the United Kingdom (UK) requires the sponsor or the designated legal representative to obtain clinical trial authorization from the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) prior to initiating the trial. Per G-CTApp and G-IRASCombRev, the UK’s combined review process offers a single application route and coordinated/parallel review from MHRA and the ethics committee (EC) leading to a single UK decision for clinical trials.

Note: G-CTApprovedCountries and the MHCTR-EUExit list the countries where a clinical trial sponsor or their legal representative may be established; these countries are initially European Union (EU) and European Economic Area (EEA) countries.

Combined Review Submission

Per G-CTApp and G-IRASCombRev, all new applications for clinical trials of investigational medicinal products (CTIMPs) must be prepared, submitted, and reviewed via the combined review process using the Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) (GBR-125). For support and getting started, users should review GBR-72 and contact the combined review team at cwow@hra.nhs.uk. Step-by-step instructions are provided in G-IRASCombRev. As delineated in GBR-9, applications submitted via the combined review service are submitted jointly by the chief investigator and the sponsor. Per GBR-116, applicants seeking fast-track review of clinical trial applications must also apply via combined review on GBR-125. Per the G-CTApp, MHRA’s notification scheme enables a more streamlined and risk-proportionate approach to processing clinical trial authorization for “initial” applications. The scheme only applies to clinical trial applications for Phase 4 and certain Phase 3 clinical trials deemed to be of lower risk. Interest in the notification scheme should be registered via the combined review process (GBR-125). Per G-ATMP, all advanced therapy medicinal products must submit clinical trial applications using the same processes as all other medicines. See Scope of Review section for fast-track eligibility criteria.

Per GBR-122, for studies that were submitted before combined review, these applicants should continue to submit amendments and reports for these studies at IRAS via GBR-78’s log-in. HRA will update sponsors and applicants with full instructions and plenty of notice for any planned changes in the future, such as the migration of existing, ongoing studies. See GBR-122, for additional details on the migration of existing materials in IRAS. GBR-72 includes learning resources and a video on the combined review process.

G-IRASCombRev contains a step-by-step guide to combined review submission. The following is an overview of the steps:

Finalize protocol and supporting documents
New users create IRAS account and create a new project and allocate roles
Complete project details, study information, and clinical trial dataset in IRAS and upload supporting documentation
Send application to the sponsor to review and authorize
Book an EC online and submit application
G-IRASCombRev indicates that when selecting an EC meeting that is not the first available meeting, the 60-day regulatory clock for both the EC and the MHRA will start on the cutoff date for the meeting that is chosen, which is 14 days before the meeting date. Once booked, the EC booking page will update to show the confirmed booking details. The applicant will then be able to scroll down the page to select the option to “submit to the regulators.” See G-IRASCombRev for detailed step-by-step instructions.

For overall help during the submission process, see the CTapp-Issues which identifies common issues with validation and assessment of clinical trial applications and how to avoid them.

Other regulatory information aside from new clinical trial applications are to be submitted pursuant to the G-MHRASubmiss. These submittals include substantial amendments for existing clinical trials, end-of-trial notifications, and developmental safety update reports (DSURs). The G-CTAuth-GBR also states that clinical trials not approved or yet transitioned over to the combined review process should continue to use the online MHRA Submissions portal (GBR-13). The steps for gaining access to GBR-13 are contained in the G-MHRASubmiss and GBR-11.

For overviews of submittals to MHRA, see GBR-18. Also see the Initiation, Agreements & Registration section for information on obtaining a trial identification number during trial registration.

The UKwide-Rsrch provides guidance and requirements for research in more than one (1) United Kingdom (UK) nation, and specifies that the four (4) nations of the UK take a consistent approach to study-wide reviews so that sponsors only need to submit one (1) application on GBR-125 in most circumstances. Each UK nation will take assurances from the site-wide review conducted by the lead nation (the nation conducting the initial review).

As described in GBR-78, other relevant approvals can be sought on the IRAS site. For example, applicants can request inclusion in the National Institute for Health and Care Research, Research Delivery Network (NIHR RDN) Portfolio, which comprises high-quality clinical research studies that receive support services from the RDN in England.

Per G-CTApp, MHRA supports the conduct of trials with complex innovative designs such as umbrella, basket, platform, and master protocol plus submodules. When submitting a clinical trial application for a trial with innovative designs that involve prospective major adaptations, the sponsor must justify the choice of a complex trial design, ensure that each adaptation as well as the entire trial are safe and scientifically sound, and describe how the integrity of trial results will be maintained throughout the conduct of the trial. See G-CTApp for example scenarios of when it is appropriate to propose major adaptations via submission of a substantial amendment request. Before submitting an application for authorization of a trial with a complex innovative design and/or an amendment requesting approval of major adaptations, sponsors are recommended to establish a dialogue with the MHRA and seek advice.

As delineated in the MHCTR, the clinical trial application and accompanying material must be provided in English.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

As specified in the G-CTApp, a clinical trial submission package to the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) should contain the following documents:

Cover letter (when applicable, the subject line should state that the submission is for a Phase 1 trial and is eligible for a shortened assessment time, or if it is submitted as part of the notification scheme); this letter should clearly highlight the Purchase Order (PO) number to help the MHRA invoice and allocate payments promptly and efficiently
Clinical trial application form in PDF and XML versions
Protocol document
Investigator’s brochure (IB)
Investigational medical product dossier (IMPD) or a simplified IMPD
Summary of scientific advice obtained from the MHRA or any other regulatory authority, if available
Manufacturer’s authorization, including the importer’s authorization and Qualified Person declaration on good manufacturing practice for each manufacturing site if the product is manufactured outside the European Union (EU) (See G-ImportIMPs and the Manufacturing & Import section for more information)
Copy of the United Kingdom (UK) or the European Medicines Agency’s decision on the pediatric investigation plan and the opinion of the pediatric committee, if applicable
Content of the labelling of the investigational product (IP) (known as investigational medicinal product (IMP) in the UK) (or justification for its absence)
Ethics Committee Requirements

As per the MHCTR, the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), ECs require the chief investigator (CI) to submit the following documentation for ethics approval:

Application for an EC opinion
A summary of the trial, including justification, relevance, and methodology to be used
Research hypothesis
Statistical analysis and justification for the numbers of participants to be recruited
Protocol
IB
Peer review process details
Sponsor name and contact information
Financial arrangements for the trial (e.g., funding sources, participant reimbursement, compensation provisions in the event of trial-related injury or death, and insurance or indemnity coverage for sponsor and investigator(s)) (See the Insurance & Compensation section for additional information)
Terms of agreement between the sponsor and participating institution(s)
Material to be used (including advertisements) to recruit potential research participants (See the Initiation, Agreements & Registration section for additional information on participant recruitment)
Informed consent form and copies of materials to be provided to participants (See the Required Elements section for additional information)
Participant treatment plans
Benefit/risk assessment for participants
Investigator(s) Curriculum Vitaes (CVs)
Trial design and suitability of facilities
Further, to help with planning before seeking EC approval, GBR-18 provides a checklist for CIs.

Clinical Protocol

Per GBR-9, the protocol describes the objectives, design, methodology, statistical considerations and organization of a clinical trial. According to GBR-113, the clinical protocol should contain the following elements:

Protocol summary
Sponsor or designated representative name and contact information
Investigator(s) CV(s) and contact information
IP description (See the Investigational Products topic for detailed coverage of this subject)
Form, dosage, route, method, and frequency of administration; treatment period
Trial objectives and purpose
Trial design, random selection method, and blinding level
Participant selection/withdrawal
Participant treatment
Summary of potential risks and known benefits to research participants
Safety and efficacy assessments
Adverse event reporting requirements (See the Safety Reporting section for additional information)
Statistics and methods to track trial data
Sponsor specifications for direct access to source data/documents
Quality control/quality assurance procedures and practices
Ethical considerations
Data management and recordkeeping
Financing and insurance details
Publication policy
For complete protocol requirements, refer to GBR-113.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

On October 31, 2025, the Health Research Authority (HRA) updated G-IRASCombRev. This information is also available in a new and easy-to-use format, the IRAS User Guide. 

Overview

Per G-CTApp and G-IRASCombRev, all new applications for clinical trials of investigational medicinal products (CTIMPs) must be prepared, submitted, and reviewed via the combined review process. Combined review offers a single application route and coordinated/parallel review from the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) and the ethics committee (EC) leading to a single United Kingdom (UK) decision for clinical trials.

Combined Review

Per the G-CTApp and GBR-72, the initial combined review assessment will be completed within 30 days of being submitted. As indicated in the G-IRASCombRev, the application will be validated within three (3) days of being received. During the technical review, if there are requests for further information, applicants have 14 days to respond. To formally request an extension to respond to a request for information (RFI), the applicant should email the MHRA at clintrialhelpline@mhra.gov.uk advising how much time beyond the usual 14 days is needed. A final decision will be issued 10 days after the response has been received. An RFI extension will affect overall review timelines. Per GBR-68, the EC will notify the sponsor of its initial/provisional decision, usually within 10 working days of the EC meeting. The G-CTApp indicates that applications for healthy volunteer trials and sponsor-determined phase 1 trials in non-oncology participants may qualify for a shortened assessment time and MHRA will work with the EC to expedite these applications. The MHRA and the EC will inform applicants of the outcome of a submission. If there are grounds for non-acceptance of the application, the applicant will have the opportunity to respond, usually within 14 days, though this may be extended on request. The MHCTR, GBR-9, and GBR-68 state that the EC must give its final opinion within 60 calendar days of receipt of a valid application. When an EC requires further information before confirming its opinion, it may give a provisional opinion, and the time required for the EC to receive a complete response to its request does not count against the 60-day timeline. Certain studies, including gene therapy studies, will take 90 days, or 180 days if a specialist group or committee is consulted.

The G-CTApp states that the MHRA uses automated electronic communication. To ensure receipt of MHRA correspondence, applicants should add MHRA_CT_Ecomms@mhra.gov.uk to their safe sender email list. MHRA will only send official correspondence to the named applicant email address. According to the MHCTR, if the sponsor or the designated representative does not receive a request for additional information from the MHRA within 30 days, the clinical trial application is treated as authorized.

Regarding the new notification scheme, the G-CTApp states that this pathway enables a more streamlined and risk-proportionate approach to processing clinical trial authorization for “initial” applications for Phase 4 and certain Phase 3 clinical trials deemed to be of lower risk. Applications submitted under this scheme will be processed by the MHRA within 14 calendar days from the application received effective date, provided the sponsor can demonstrate the trial meets the inclusion criteria. Authorization by the MHRA will be granted unless any criterion is not suitably met. If the MHRA determines the application does not meet the criteria, an objection decision will be communicated within 14 calendar days from the application received effective date, and the application will continue under the full authorization assessment with a decision communicated within the 30-day statutory timeframe.

In addition, as stated in the G-CTApp, certain first-in-human (Phase 1) trials of investigational products with higher risk or greater elements of uncertainty require the MHRA to seek advice from the Clinical Trials, Biologicals, and Vaccines Expert Advisory Group (CTBV EAG) of the Commission on Human Medicines (CHM) before approval for the trial can be given. See the G-CTApp for detailed requirements.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile) 

Starting October 1, 2025, new Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) submissions must use the July 2025 commercial model agreements for use with participating National Health Service (NHS) and Health and Social Care (HSC). The template agreements can be found on IRAS Help.

Overview

In accordance with the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, and GAfREC, a clinical trial can only commence after the sponsor or the designated representative receives authorization from the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) and the chief investigator (CI) receives an approval from a recognized ethics committee (EC). In addition, GBR-9 clarifies that a favorable EC opinion does not imply that research activity at sites can begin. Confirmation of management permission or approval from relevant care organization(s) to proceed with the research also needs to be in place. In addition, if the EC issued a favorable opinion with additional conditions, the clinical trial cannot start until these conditions are met. GBR-18 indicates that once all the relevant approvals are in place, all documentation has been finalized, and all participating sites have the information they need, the trial can begin. This process is often achieved by holding a start-up meeting at each site so that the CI ensures all technical aspects of a trial and protocol requirements are fully understood by relevant site staff. Trial-specific training (protocol and procedures) and review of trial conduct (e.g., safety reporting) is often undertaken at this stage. For clinical trials of an investigational product (IP), this communication should also include pharmacy staff, if applicable, so that they can confirm all requirements are in place before dispensing IPs to participants.

Per GBR-9, research should normally commence within 12 months of the date on which a favorable ethics opinion is given by an EC. A study is generally considered to have commenced when any of the procedures set out in the protocol are initiated. If the study does not commence within 12 months, the Chief Investigator (CI) should give the EC a written explanation for the delay. A further explanation should be given again after 24 months. If a study is abandoned prior to commencement, the CI or sponsor of a CTIMP should notify the EC and the MHRA by letter giving reasons. It is not necessary to submit the form for declaring the conclusion or early termination of the study. If a study is abandoned and it is later proposed to start it afresh, a new application should be made.

See GBR-40 for information about DigiTrials, which supports clinical trials in England to provide safe, authorized access to patient data to help set up trials. DigiTrials includes recruitment and feasibility services to identify whether there are enough suitable participants, as well as participant communication and outcomes services.

Per the MHCTR and GBR-18, specific documentation, including MHRA licensing, must be in place before an IP can be released for a clinical trial.

As stated in the MHCTR, clinical trials should be conducted in compliance with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), and laboratory practices for IPs must comply with the UK-GLPs. Per the CTIMP-Condtns, MHRA assumes that the trial will commence within 12 months of the date of the favorable ethical opinion. The EC must be notified of the trial start date with evidence of the authorization. Further, the trial should not commence at any site until management permission has been obtained from the organization responsible for the care of the participants at the site. If the trial does not commence within 12 months of the favorable opinion being issued, the sponsor should send the EC a written explanation for the delay. A further written explanation should be sent after 24 months if the research has still not commenced. If the trial does not commence within 24 months of the favorable opinion being issued, the EC may recommend to the MHRA that the clinical trial authorization should be suspended or terminated. See CTIMP-Condtns for additional information on standard conditions for clinical trials.

Per GBR-78, the Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) helps users meet regulatory and governance requirements from relevant review bodies in the UK. As described in GBR-67, approval from the Health Research Authority (HRA) is required for all National Health Service (NHS) project-based research led from England or Wales. HRA and Health and Care Research Wales (HCRW) approval brings together the assessment of governance and legal compliance. Projects led from Northern Ireland or Scotland and involve NHS sites are handled through the appropriate permission process for that lead nation. Studies with sites in Northern Ireland or Scotland are supported through existing UK-wide compatibility systems where each country accepts relevant centralized assurances from national coordinating functions to avoid duplication. See GBR-78 for more information.

Clinical Trial Agreement

According to GBR-107 and GBR-70, contracts and agreements should be in place prior to the initiation of a trial. GBR-107 provides model templates that apply UK-wide (unless otherwise indicated) and should be used unmodified to avoid delays, including:

Commercial Model Clinical Trial Agreements and Clinical Research Organization (CRO) Model Clinical Trial Agreement
Commercial Model Clinical Trial Agreements for Investigational Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products
Commercial Primary Care Model Clinical Trial
Model Clinical Investigation Agreement and CRO Model Clinical Investigation Agreement
Model Non-Commercial Agreement
UK template Hub and Spoke Agreements for use between lead trial sites (where a principal investigator is based) and other trial sites and designed as subcontracts, passing down rights and responsibilities from the lead site to the other sites
Model agreements for Participant Identification Centers which identify potential research participants
Model Confidentiality Disclosure Agreements for use during the early set-up of commercial contract research in NHS organizations
Model Commercial Chief Investigator Agreement
The UKwide-Rsrch reiterates that national model contracts are available and, as such, contracting expectations and arrangements across the four (4) UK nations are broadly similar. For all four (4) nations:

In commercially sponsored research, it is mandatory to use the unmodified contract templates appropriate to the study type
In non-commercially sponsored research, it is expected that the unmodified contract appropriate to the study type is used; use of bespoke or modified agreements, where an appropriate template exists, is likely to result in significant delay and costly review; any modifications must be highlighted in the application
The UKwide-Rsrch also highlights national differences relating to the way contractual agreements are reviewed and agreed. In England and Wales, sponsors must obtain a waiver from HRA and HCRW to use a modified or bespoke agreement (an agreement that differs from a published UK-wide model agreement template). This waiver allows NHS sites to freely negotiate all the contractual terms of the agreement; in Wales, this negotiation is carried out with a central team. In Northern Ireland, to modify the UK-wide model agreement template, a waiver is needed from the Health and Social Care R&D Approvals Service, which allows sites to freely negotiate all the contractual terms of the agreement. In Scotland, sponsors can expect to carry out a single contract negotiation for all Scottish sites, which will be negotiated with a nominated lead site or central team. If the study is single center, it will be negotiated at the relevant site.

Additional details and templates are available in GBR-107 and GBR-70.

Clinical Trial Registration

As per the GBR-102 and the G-CTApp, the sponsor or investigator is required to register the clinical trial in a publicly accessible database as a condition of a favorable ethical opinion. Registration should occur before the first participant is recruited and no later than six (6) weeks after recruitment of the first participant. To help researchers meet the UK’s transparency requirements, GBR-102 indicates that the HRA will automatically register approved clinical trials with the International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial Number (ISRCTN) Registry (GBR-47) to ensure that information is publicly available. ISRCTN is the UK’s preferred clinical trials registry. HRA’s commitment to register clinical trials on behalf of sponsors and researchers is in line with the “Make It Public” research transparency strategy (see GBR-55). If a trial approved through combined review is registered, or will be registered, on ClinicalTrials.gov (GBR-49), a request to not automatically register with ISRCTN can be submitted in the combined review portion of IRAS (GBR-125). In this case, the study will be published on the HRA research summaries webpage.

Per GBR-18, each clinical trial must have a unique trial number. Clinical trials with sites in the European Union (EU), the European Economic Area (EEA), or Northern Ireland should also apply for a European number. Per GBR-87, all new clinical trials with sites in Europe should register on the EU’s Clinical Trials Information System (CTIS) (GBR-39). GBR-39 specifies that all ongoing trials after January 30, 2025 should have been submitted to GBR-39. For more information, see the EudraCT transition fact sheet (GBR-16). CTIMP-Condtns indicates that for clinical trials involving sites in both the UK and the EU, a record in EU’s GBR-39 does not satisfy the public registry condition because the UK component of the trial will not be visible in CTIS (GBR-39). Failure to register is a breach of the clinical trial conditions unless a deferral has been agreed to.

Per GBR-102, HRA also recognizes any registry covered by the World Health Organization (WHO) or the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE), such as ClinicalTrials.gov (GBR-49).

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile)  

On October 31, 2025, the Health Research Authority (HRA) updated G-IRASCombRev. This information is also available in a new and easy-to-use format, the IRAS User Guide. 

Safety Reporting Definitions

According to GBR-1 and GBR-64, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of the United Kingdom’s (UK’s) safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event or Adverse Experience (AE) – Any untoward medical occurrence in a participant, including occurrences which are not necessarily caused by or related to that product
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – Any untoward and unintended response in a participant to an investigational medicinal product which is related to any dose administered to that participant
Serious Adverse Event (SAE), Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (SADR), or Unexpected SADR – Any AE, ADR, or unexpected ADR that results in death, is life threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – An adverse reaction where the nature or severity is inconsistent with the applicable product information
Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR) – A suspected serious adverse reaction, which is also “unexpected,” meaning that its nature and severity are not consistent with the information about the medicinal product in question
Per the G-CTAuth-GBR, the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) advises that the guidance on reference safety information (RSI) contained in GBR-30 (developed by the Clinical Trials Facilitation Group of the Heads of Medicines Agencies (HMA)) remains applicable. For clinical trials that are being conducted in the UK, an RSI cannot be used for expectedness until the RSI has been approved by the MHRA. Additional SUSARs that occur before the new RSI is approved should be reported in the usual expedited manner. If sponsors wish to harmonize the implementation date of an RSI in a trial that includes European Union (EU) and UK sites, then they can use the date when approval is granted in all member states and the UK. In the interest of efficiency and harmonization for multinational trials, the MHRA recommends that amendments including changes to the RSI are submitted to the UK and EU at the same time. The RSI in place at the time the SUSAR occurred should be used to assess expectedness for follow-up reports.

Safety Reporting Requirements

Per GBR-99, a sponsor or investigator may take appropriate urgent safety measures (USMs) to protect research participants against any immediate hazard to their health or safety, without prior authorization from a regulatory body. The G-IRASCombRev, GBR-9, and GBR-99 state that for trials which have been submitted via the combined review service, one USM notification is made via the combined review part of the Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) (GBR-125) and received by the MHRA. No additional notification is required directly to the EC. GBR-32 states that SUSARs and safety reports for clinical trials of investigational medicinal products (CTIMPs) that were approved by combined review should be submitted to the MHRA only. If the safety report requires action, the MHRA will instruct the study team to submit a substantial amendment. Any other SUSARs or annual safety report submitted UK wide will be acknowledged by email by the EC. The submitted cover report for the SUSAR or annual safety report will not be signed and returned, and the email will act as the formal acknowledgement.

In addition, the G-CTAuth-GBR states that the sponsor should call the MHRA’s Clinical Trials Unit at 020 3080 6456 to discuss the USM issue with a safety scientist, ideally within 24 hours of measures being taken, but no later than three (3) days. If key details are not available during the initial call, then the sponsor should inform the MHRA no later than three (3) days from the date the measures are taken by email to clintrialhelpline@mhra.gov.uk. Written notification in the form of a substantial amendment is also required. The substantial amendment covering the changes made as part of the USM is anticipated within approximately two (2) weeks of notification to the MHRA. Any potential reason for delay of substantial amendment submission should be discussed and agreed upon with the MHRA at the time of initial notification or through a follow-up call. Submission of the substantial amendment must not be delayed by additional changes outside of those taken and required as an urgent safety measure. Unrelated and unacceptable changes may result in rejection. For more details on how submissions should be made using MHRA Submissions, see G-CTAuth-GBR.

Investigator Responsibilities

As specified in the MHCTR, GBR-1, and GBR-30, the investigator is responsible for reporting all SAEs/SADRs immediately to the sponsor. The report may be made orally or in writing and followed by a detailed report no later than 24 hours after the event. When the reported event results in a participant’s death, the investigator must provide the sponsor with any requested information. According to the MHCTR, in cases where reporting is not immediately required according to the protocol or the Investigator’s Brochure (IB), the investigator should report an SAE/SADR within the appropriate timeframe based on the trial requirements, the seriousness of the SAE/SADR, and protocol or IB guidelines. Per GBR-1, the investigator and the sponsor share responsibility for the assessment and evaluation of adverse events with regard to seriousness, causality, and expectedness.

See GBR-18 for a safety reporting flowchart that gives an overview of the investigator’s expedited safety reporting requirements to the sponsor for a clinical trial in the UK.

Sponsor Responsibilities

According to the MHCTR, the G-CTAuth-GBR, and the MHCTR-EUExit, the sponsor is required to record and report all relevant information about fatal or life-threatening SUSARs as soon as possible, but no later than seven (7) calendar days to the MHRA, to the institution in which the trial is being conducted, and to the EC. Any additional relevant information should be sent within eight (8) days of the initial report. The sponsor must also report any non-fatal or non-life threatening SUSARs no later than 15 calendar days following first awareness of the event. Per GBR-1, the investigator and the sponsor share responsibility for the assessment and evaluation of adverse events with regard to seriousness, causality, and expectedness. Per the G-CTAuth-GBR, sponsors must report all UK-relevant SUSARs to the MHRA. The agency’s definition of ‘UK-relevant’ includes:

SUSARs originating in the UK for a trial
SUSARs originating outside the UK for a trial
If the sponsor is serving as a sponsor of another ongoing trial outside the UK involving the same medicinal product
SUSARs involving the same medicinal product if the sponsor of the trial outside the UK is either part of the same mother company or develops the medicinal product jointly, on the basis of a formal agreement, with the UK sponsor
Per GBR-18, sponsors should develop formal, written processes for the management of adverse events and safety reports, including the handling of both expedited reports and annual safety reporting.

Other Safety Reports

Per the G-CTAuth-GBR, sponsors must submit Development Safety Update Reports (DSURs) to the MHRA. The DSUR should consider all new available safety information received during the reporting period. The DSUR should include information in the ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Development Safety Update Report (E2F) (GBR-61) and also the following:

Proof of payment to MHRA to submit the DSUR
A cover letter listing all relevant clinical trial numbers of trials covered by the DSUR (including all the IRAS IDs and the EudraCT and CTIS numbers (GBR-87 and GBR-39)), an email address for correspondence, and the payment reference number in the format: ‘DSUR-[5 digit MHRA company number]-[IMP name]-[Payment date DD/MM/YYYY]
An analysis of the participant’s safety in the concerned clinical trial(s) with an appraisal of its ongoing risk/benefit
A listing of all suspected serious adverse reactions (including all SUSARs) that occurred in the trial(s), including all SUSARs from third countries
An aggregate summary tabulation of SUSARs that occurred in the concerned trial(s)
Region-specific information on how to increase transparency
As stated in the G-CTAuth-GBR, at the end of the DSUR reporting period, the sponsor may assess the new safety information that has been generated and submit any proposed safety changes to the IB as a substantial amendment. This amendment must be supported by the DSUR and approved before the RSI is changed.

The MHRA and Health Canada jointly released DSUR-UK_Canada to strengthen participant safety in clinical trials by improving the quality of DSURs. To increase the transparency of the data included in DSURs, the MHRA and Health Canada are requiring that the region-specific section of the DSUR explain how safety data were reviewed during the reporting period. Specifically, the region-specific section of the DSUR should include a summary description of the processes used by the sponsor to review the worldwide safety data of the investigational product (IP) (e.g., regular analyses of accumulating data, in-house safety review meetings, proposal of specific pharmacovigilance activities, or substantial modifications of the protocol). In addition, the region-specific section must describe how each safety signal (i.e., an event with an unknown causal relationship to the IP) identified during the reporting period was evaluated, as well as how a decision was made regarding the signal itself.

See the G-CTAuth-GBR, the MHCTR, GBR-1, GBR-18, GBR-30, and GBR-99 for detailed reporting requirements for the investigator and sponsor.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

Per the G-CTAuth-GBR, SUSARs during clinical trials should be reported to the MHRA in one (1) of the following ways:

Individual Case Safety Reports (ICSR) Submissions (GBR-126) (which replaces the EudraVigilance website (EVWEB)) – The ICSR Submissions route is used to submit single reports. (Note that per GBR-127, MHRA also decommissioned the eSUSAR reporting platform.)
MHRA Gateway (which replaces the EudraVigilance Gateway) – To gain access to the MHRA Gateway, which is used to submit bulk reports, users must first register via MHRA Submissions (GBR-13). The steps for gaining access to MHRA Submissions are contained within the G-MHRASubmiss and GBR-11.
Regarding submission of the DSUR to MHRA, the G-CTAuth-GBR, states that a fee must be paid online (GBR-43) prior to submission of the DSUR. Per the G-IRASCombRev, once paid, the DSUR should be submitted via the combined review section of the IRAS (GBR-125). See the Regulatory Fees section for more information on DSUR fees.

See the Regulatory Fees section for information on fees for annual safety reporting and DSURs. See the G-CTAuth-GBR and GBR-99 for more details on submittal and delivery requirements.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

In accordance with the G-CTAuth-GBR, GBR-32 and GBR-65, it is no longer a requirement to submit annual progress reports to the ethics committee (EC) for all studies receiving a final EC opinion in England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. Alternatively, the G-CTAuth-GBR indicates that annual safety reports (Development Safety Update Reports (DSURs)) must be submitted, completing relevant sections of the report that are applicable to the trial. (See Safety Reporting section for information on DSURs). However, note that GBR-65 states that depending on the type of approval, a progress report may be requested to track progress.

See the Regulatory Fees section for information on fees for annual progress reports.

Final Report

As per the MHCTR and the G-CTAuth-GBR, the sponsor must notify the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) and the EC in writing that a clinical trial has ended within 90 days of the conclusion of the trial. As indicated in GBR-128, all project-based research (not research tissue banks or research databases) that has been reviewed by an EC needs to submit a final report within 12 months of the end of the study. The final report should be completed and submitted in the combined review part of Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) (GBR-125). When completing the final report form, IRAS guides the user with instructions next to each question.

The G-CTAuth-GBR further specifies that a declaration of the end of a clinical trial should be sent to the MHRA within 90 days of the global end of the trial and within 15 days of the global premature end of the trial. The submission must include an end of trial form (GBR-133) and a cover letter. Note that only the global end-of-trial notification is required to be submitted. However, a facility may inform the MHRA of the local (UK) end of trial via the end-of-trial notification form, but these local notifications will not be officially acknowledged and the MHRA Submissions automatic email confirmation should be considered as evidence of submission. If a local end of trial is submitted, the MHRA would still expect to receive relevant safety updates and substantial amendments for the ongoing trial until the global end of trial notification is received. An exemption to this requirement must be requested via a substantial amendment for approval. The amendment must clearly state to what documents the proposal relates and provide a robust rationale for the request. All safety documentation must be submitted unless there are no other trials ongoing with the same product in the UK. Any trial activities (such as follow-ups, visits) must be completed before the submission of the global end-of-trial declaration form. It is not possible to submit amendments to the trial or the DSUR once the global end-of-trial declaration form has been received by the MHRA. If the end-of-trial declaration has been received within a reporting period, or within 60 days following the data lock point, the corresponding DSUR will not be required.

Per the G-CTAuth-GBR, the timeframe for publishing the summary of results is within one (1) year of the end of trial. Sponsors should publish summary results within this timeframe in the public register(s) where they registered the clinical trial. While it is not required to submit this clinical trial summary report to the MHRA, sponsors must send a short confirmation email to CT.Submission@mhra.gov.uk once the results-related information has been uploaded to the public register and provide the relevant link.

As per GBR-9, for all project-based research that have received a favorable ethics opinion from an EC, a final report on the research should be submitted to the UK Health Departments’ Research Ethics Service (RES) (GBR-62) within one (1) year of the trial’s conclusion. In the case of early termination, the provision of a final report is at the discretion of the sponsor. All final reports will be acknowledged within 30 days. The EC should be notified of receipt of the report, and the EC can ask to see a copy of the final report on request. In addition, GBR-20 clarifies that the form in GBR-20 should be used for this submittal, which includes submitting a lay summary of results. This is a UK-wide final report for all project-based research studies that have been reviewed by an EC within the RES (GBR-62). The information contained in this final report helps the RES to monitor whether the research was conducted in accordance with the EC’s favorable opinion and applicable transparency requirements. Per the GBR-120, sponsors should include a plain language summary of their findings in the final report, which will be published on HRA’s website alongside the study research summaries. See GBR-120 for guidance on writing a good plain language summary for a general audience.

Per the G-PIPs, UK marketing authorization holders who sponsor a study that involves the use of the authorized medicinal product in the pediatric population, must submit to the MHRA results of the study within six (6) months after the trial ended. Additional requirements and submittal details are in the G-PIPs and the G-PIPsProcess.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile) 

The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 was signed into law in April 2025 and will come into force on April 28, 2026, after a 12-month implementation period. See HRA’s Guidance on changes to the clinical trials regulations and MHRA’s draft guidance to support sponsors in preparing for the implementation of the new regulations.

As per the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, the G-CTApp, GBR-103, GBR-9, GBR-2, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), the sponsor is defined as an individual, company, institution, or organization who takes ultimate responsibility for the initiation, management, and financing (or arranging the financing) of a trial. The sponsor must ensure that the trial design meets appropriate standards and arrange for the trial to be properly conducted and reported. In addition, per GBR-101, the sponsor is the individual, organization, or partnership that takes on overall responsibility for proportionate, effective arrangements being in place to set up, run, and report a research project.

In accordance with GBR-113, the United Kingdom (UK) also permits a sponsor to transfer any or all of its trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO) and/or institutional site(s). However, the ultimate responsibility for the trial data’s quality and integrity always resides with the sponsor. Any trial-related responsibilities transferred to a CRO should be specified in a written agreement. The CRO should implement quality assurance and quality control. Per the G-CTApp, G-SubtlAmndmt, and the GBR-103, the clinical trial sponsor or legal representative needs to be established in the UK or a country on an approved country list which initially includes the European Union (EU)/European Economic Area (EEA) countries per G-CTApprovedCountries. A change in sponsor or legal representative for a UK trial is a substantial amendment requiring submission to both the MHRA and the ethics committee. GBR-103 specifies that the legal representative:

May be an individual person or a representative of a corporate entity
Does not have to be a legally qualified person
Should be willing to act as the agent of the sponsor in the event of any legal proceedings instituted (e.g., for service of legal documents)
Should be established at an address in the UK or a country on the approved country list
Does not assume any of the legal liabilities of the sponsor(s) for the trial by virtue of the role of legal representative and does not therefore require insurance or indemnity to meet such liabilities; but may, in some cases, enter into specific contractual arrangements to undertake some or all of the statutory duties of the sponsor in relation to the trial, in which case the legal representative would also be regarded as a co-sponsor and would then require insurance or indemnity cover
The MHCTR also permits two (2) or more parties to take responsibility for the sponsor’s functions. When this applies, the MHCTR requires one (1) of the parties to submit the clinical trial application for authorization to the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), and to specify who is responsible for carrying out the following functions:

Communications relating to substantial amendments, modified amendments, and trial conclusion
Communications relating to urgent safety measures
Pharmacovigilance reporting
Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Overview

As set forth in the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical trial, taking into account the appropriateness and availability of the study site and facilities. The MHCTR2006 indicates that the sponsor must also ensure that the investigator(s) are qualified by training and experience. Additionally, the sponsor must define and allocate all study related duties and responsibilities to the relevant parties participating in the study. GBR-9 states that the chief investigator (CI) should be based in the United Kingdom (UK). In rare cases when this is not required, adequate arrangements must be in place for supervision of the study in the UK. Further, it is possible to accept a co-CI (joint lead applicants) as this can help less experienced researchers develop new skills. The details of the arrangement should be outlined in the application. Correspondence will only be sent to the lead applicant, therefore the individual named as the CI in the application form is responsible for passing on any information and sharing correspondence with their team.

As delineated in the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, and GBR-113, prior to entering into an agreement with the investigator(s) and the institution(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and an investigator’s brochure. Per GBR-113, if a multicenter trial is going to be conducted, the sponsor must organize a coordinating committee or select coordinating investigators. Per GBR-18, for clinical trials of investigational medicinal products (CTIMPs) conducted at National Health Service (NHS) sites, the addition of a new site and/or addition or change of a principal investigator (PI) is no longer considered a substantial amendment. No changes have been made to the classification of amendments relating to new sites/change of PI at non-NHS sites. If a site is added in a nation not previously involved in a study, this should be indicated in the combined review section (GBR-125) of the Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) for CTIMPs, and made clear in a cover letter when submitting the amendment to the lead nation.

UK Local Information Pack

Per GBR-63 and GBR-106, the Health Research Authority’s (HRA) UK Local Information Pack (LIP) provides a consistent set of documents to support study setup and delivery across NHS/Health and Social Care in Northern Ireland (HSC) organizations in England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. While the core contents are standardized, country-specific processes govern how the LIP is distributed and used.

England and Wales: the sponsor should send the LIP directly to the site's R&D office, delivery team, and local network (if applicable, the National Institute for Health and Care Research, Research Delivery Network (NIHR RDN) Portfolio)
Scotland: the NHS Research Scotland Permissions Coordinating Centre distributes the LIP to R&D offices and relevant portfolio managers, while sponsors provide it to research teams using a Scotland-specific email template.
Northern Ireland: the sponsor may send the LIP to participating sites after receiving instruction from the HSC R&D Approvals Service.
Sponsors should also be aware of additional requirements, such as translating patient-facing materials into Welsh for sites in Wales. For templates, detailed instructions, and contact information by country, refer to GBR-106 and GBR-63.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

GBR-103 provides that if a sponsor(s) is not established in the UK or on an approved country list (which initially includes European Union (EU)/European Economic Area (EEA) countries), it is a statutory requirement to appoint a legal representative based in the UK or a country on the approved country list for the purposes of the trial. Per the G-CTApprovedCountries, the UK published a list of countries where a sponsor of a clinical trial, or their legal representative, may be established; currently listed countries are those in the EU and EEA. The G-SubtlAmndmt delineates that a change in sponsor or legal representative for a UK trial is a substantial amendment requiring submission to both the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) and the ethics committee (EC), pursuant to the guidelines in the G-CTAuth-GBR. Where the sponsor is from the rest of the world, and the legal representative is established in the UK, and there are sites in the EU/EEA, the sponsor will need to assign an EU/EEA legal representative for these sites via a substantial amendment to the relevant EU/EEA competent authorities. No amendment submission to the MHRA is required where the sponsor or legal representative for an ongoing trial is established in the EU/EEA as the UK will continue to accept this approval. Further, no amendment will need to be submitted in the UK if the sponsor retains the UK legal representative for the UK study. Similarly, no amendment will need to be submitted in the UK if a sponsor remains in the UK and a legal representative is added to cover EU/EEA sites.

Additional foreign sponsor requirements are listed in Section 5.2 of GBR-113.

Data Safety and Monitoring Board

Per GBR-18, the chief investigator should ensure that arrangements are made for a data safety and monitoring board (known as a data monitoring committee (DMC) in the UK). GBR-113 recommends establishing a DMC to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial.

Multicenter Studies

Per GBR-18, for multicenter trials, the careful selection and evaluation of investigator sites is critical for the successful completion of a trial within budget, timelines, and to ensure the generation of high-quality data. When undertaking site selection, the preparation of ‘reserve’ investigator sites (so that the trial may be extended to these sites if recruitment issues arise) should be considered as part of proactive trial planning. Factors that should influence investigator site selection include:

Interest in the research question
Experience and qualifications of the investigator
Sufficient staff to conduct the study and their experience and qualifications
Availability of a suitable patient population
Adequate time to conduct and oversee the trial
Adequate facilities
Previous track record with similar trials
Geographic location
Contractual and budgetary negotiations and arrangements
Per GBR-18, for multicenter trials, the CI must ensure that each PI is provided with all relevant, version-controlled documents before commencing recruitment. Further, it is good practice to ensure the PI signs a protocol signature page to confirm receipt and their agreement to comply with the current version of the protocol. The trial master file should be held at the coordinating site and copies of relevant documents should be kept at each participating site in an investigator site file.

Further, as delineated in GBR-113, in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication between investigators is facilitated
Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Insurance

As set forth in the MHCTR and the MHCTR2006, it is a legal requirement for an insurance and indemnity provision to be made to cover the liability of the investigator and sponsor for trial-related injuries. The MHCTR does not ascribe responsibility to the sponsor or the designated representative to obtain insurance and indemnity. However, GBR-2, GBR-103, GBR-101, and GBR-18 state that the sponsor or the designated representative is responsible for ensuring adequate insurance and indemnity arrangements are in place to cover the sponsor’s and the investigator’s potential liability, and for providing a copy of this coverage in the clinical trial application submission.

In addition, according to GBR-2, the sponsor or the designated representative must ensure that the research covered by the National Health Service (NHS)’s indemnity policy is in place for each publicly funded participating study site. See GBR-33 for detailed information on the NHS indemnity responsibilities for clinical negligence involving investigators and participants. GBR-33, specifically addresses the sponsor’s or the designated representative’s requirement to insure or indemnify the investigator participating in industry-sponsored Phase 1 clinical trials.

The International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113) also guides sponsors on providing insurance.

Compensation

Injury or Death

As specified in the MHCTR, the sponsor or the designated representative is responsible for providing compensation to research participants and/or their legal heirs in the event of Phase 1 trial-related injuries or death. According to GBR-33, the sponsor must have agreed with the research participant to provide compensation for injury whenever a causal relationship with participation is demonstrated. This undertaking can be provided directly by the sponsor through the consent process, or through authorizing the contract research organization (CRO) or investigator on behalf of the sponsor. In addition, the sponsor should follow these practices:

If the health or wellbeing of the participant deteriorates significantly as a result of taking part in the study, the sponsor will compensate the volunteer, irrespective of the ability of the participant to prove fault on the part of the sponsor or anyone else connected with the study.
The amount of compensation should be calculated by reference to the amount of damages that would commonly have been awarded for similar injuries by an English court had liability been proven. The amount of compensation may be reduced if the volunteer is partly responsible for the injury or if the volunteer is separately compensated under any other insurance policy.
The sponsor and participant agree to refer any dispute about whether compensation is payable or the amount of such compensation to an arbitrator with power to consult a barrister of 10 years’ standing on any issue of law, including the amount of damages to be paid.
Participants should be given a copy of the relevant Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI) guidelines and should be invited to seek clarification of any aspect of the undertaking that is not clear to them.
Participants may make a claim through the investigator, and the sponsor should aim to respond sympathetically and promptly.
GBR-113 also provides guidance for sponsors on providing compensation to research participants in the event of trial-related injuries or death. The sponsor must explain to participants the compensation and/or treatment available to them in the event of trial-related injuries.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As stated in the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, and GBR-92, the sponsor is responsible for maintaining quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113). The sponsor is required to obtain agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. QC should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been correctly processed. The sponsor must also obtain the investigator(s) and the institution(s) agreement to:

Conduct the trial in compliance with GBR-113 and the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and approved by the ethics committee (EC)
Comply with data recording and reporting procedures
Permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection
Retain essential documents until the sponsor informs them that they are no longer needed
MHCTR2006 requires the sponsor to notify the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) of serious breaches of good clinical practice (GCP) or the trial protocol. A serious breach is defined as one that is likely to affect to a significant degree: the safety or physical or mental integrity of the trial participants; or the scientific value of the trial. Per G-MHRA-SeriousBreaches, the sponsor or delegated party should notify the MHRA GCP Inspectorate within seven (7) days of becoming aware of a serious breach. Further, the sponsor should investigate and take action simultaneously after the MHRA notification. Notifications should primarily be sent to the following email address: GCP.SeriousBreaches@mhra.gov.uk.

Per the G-RiskAssmt, MHRA recommends that a risk assessment is undertaken for all clinical trials. Phase 1 trials are required to have a documented risk assessment process and to produce a risk assessment for all proposed trials. The risk assessment should be done as early as possible to help the sponsor identify whether the sponsor wishes to proceed with sponsorship and the potential category of investigational product (IP) (known as investigational medicinal products (IMP) in the United Kingdom (UK)) for eventual marketing authorization. An early risk assessment will also identify the study management requirements, which can assist in the planning and resourcing aspects of the trial (e.g., identification of trial monitoring requirements so that these can be budgeted for in any funding application). There is no requirement to submit risk assessments to the MHRA or the ethics committee (EC). However, any safety monitoring produced because of the risk assessment must be described in the protocol. Finally, information contained in the risk assessment may prove useful in completing the application form for approvals, particularly for the EC application. See the G-RiskAssmt for details on how to conduct the risk assessment.

See GBR-10 for best practices in improving clinical trial setup to reduce timelines and increase citizens’ access to research. The GBR-71 provides resources on developing and implementing people-centered research. Also see GBR-34 for investigator training and guidance on implementing people-centered research.

Monitoring Requirements

Per GBR-18, the sponsor must develop an audit plan to assess and assure the reliability and integrity of the clinical trial systems against all relevant written standards. The following activities and checks could include the following:

Interview staff to assess whether they are appropriately trained; understand their role(s); and are working to all relevant standards, the protocol, and SOPs.
Tour the facility to assess if there are adequate resources and if the equipment is fit for its intended use.
Review documents to evaluate whether data reported is verifiable from source data and that written records confirm that the trial was conducted appropriately.
Auditors must be independent of the trial team and appropriately trained for their role. Their findings and observations must be documented in a formal audit report. Any deficiencies identified during an audit must be followed up with appropriate corrective and preventive actions wherever possible.

Per GBR-18, the MHRA may conduct inspections to ensure the clinical trial is being conducted in compliance with good clinical practice (GCP) as prescribed in GBR-92 and GBR-113. The MHRA takes a risk-based approach to inspections depending on the type of trials and risk rating. Once an inspection has been completed, a formal report outlining the findings will be sent to the inspected organization. A response to this report (describing any corrective and preventive actions) must be produced. See GBR-92 for pre-inspection checklists and other resources. Per G-RiskAssmt, GCP Inspectors will review risk assessments. The risk assessment should provide the rationale behind trial management/monitoring and GCP activities applied, or not, to the trial.

Finally, the sponsor’s audits and inspections should be conducted in compliance with GBR-113, which calls for a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The extent and nature of monitoring is flexible and permits varied approaches that improve effectiveness and efficiency. The sponsor may choose on-site monitoring, a combination of on-site and centralized monitoring, or where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan). The G-Ovrsight provides additional guidance to assist sponsors and those conducting trials on implementing adequate oversight and monitoring processes for clinical trials.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

The G-CTAuth-GBR states that the MHRA has the authority to suspend or terminate a trial. In addition, the sponsor can contact the MHRA to put a trial on temporary halt or terminate a trial. If a sponsor suspends a trial temporarily, the MHRA must be notified. Sponsors of clinical trials of investigational medicinal products (CTIMPs) must use the combined review part of the Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) (GBR-125) to submit this notification as a substantial amendment. Per GBR-122, for studies that were submitted before combined review, these applicants should continue to submit this notification at IRAS via GBR-78. The G-CTAuth-GBR indicates the notification should be made as a substantial amendment using the amendment tool, clearly explaining what has been stopped and the reasons for the suspension. To restart a trial that has been temporarily suspended, you must make the request as a substantial amendment using the notification of amendment form, providing evidence that it is safe to restart the trial.

Per the G-CTAuth-GBR and GBR-18, to terminate a CTIMP, the sponsor must notify (as a substantial amendment) the MHRA and the EC via the combined review part of IRAS (GBR-125). For studies that were submitted before combined review, the submission should be made at GBR-78, using the end-of-trial form (GBR-133). GBR-128 specifies that for CTIMPs, the declaration of end of trial must be sent to the MHRA within 15 days of the global premature end of trial. Before declaring an end of the study, sponsors should review the plans that were approved by the EC for use of tissue and data collected in the course of the study, providing information to participants, and dissemination of results. If changes need to be made to these agreed upon arrangements, the sponsor should consider whether an amendment is required before submitting the end of study notification. GBR-65 also states that if research is terminated early or is temporarily suspended, then all relevant review bodies should be notified within 15 days.

According to GBR-113, if it is discovered that noncompliance significantly affects or has the potential to significantly affect participant protection or reliability of trial results, the sponsor should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions. Further, the sponsor should also inform the EC promptly and provide the reason(s) for the termination or suspension.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

To safeguard personal data within electronic health record (EHR) systems, G-EHRAccess provides guidance on updating these systems to ensure access by sponsors and their representatives (e.g., monitors and investigators) is limited to only the records of clinical trial participants and that this access is auditable. See G-EHRAccess for details on system security, remote access, document sharing, consent, and other considerations.

According to GBR-113, when using electronic trial data handling processing systems, the sponsor must ensure and document that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. To validate such systems, the sponsor should use a risk assessment approach that takes into consideration the system’s intended use and potential to affect human participant protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, the sponsor must maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) that cover system setup, installation, and use. The SOPs should describe system validation and functionality testing, data collection and handling, system maintenance, system security measures, change control, data backup, recovery, contingency planning, and decommissioning. With respect to the use of these computerized systems, the responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the users should receive relevant training.

Records Management

As set forth in GBR-113, sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application, until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications, or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of the investigational product’s clinical development. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed.

However, per the MHCTR2006, the sponsor and the Chief Investigator must ensure that the documents contained in the trial master file are retained for at least five (5) years following the trial’s completion. The documents must be readily available to the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) upon request and be complete and legible. The sponsor should ensure that trial participant medical files are also retained for at least five (5) years after the trial’s conclusion.

In addition, GBR-113 states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Responsible Parties

For purposes of data protection requirements, the UK-GDPR the UK-DPAct, and the G-GDPR delineate the following responsible parties (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Controller – the natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data
Processor – a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body which processes personal data on behalf of the controller
Recipient – a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or another body, to which the personal data are disclosed, whether a third party or not; however, public authorities which may receive personal data in the framework of a particular inquiry in accordance with domestic law must not be regarded as recipients
Third party – a natural or legal person, public authority, agency, or body other than the data subject, controller, processor and persons who, under the direct authority of the controller or processor, are authorized to process personal data
Per the UK-GDPR and the UK-DPAct, the data protection legislation requires public authorities or bodies to appoint a data protection officer (DPO); a DPO may be required for non-public entities if they carry out certain types of processing activities. The DPO assists the sponsor with monitoring internal compliance, informs and advises on data protection obligations, provides advice regarding Data Protection Impact Assessments (DPIAs), and is a point of contact for participants and the supervisory authority. See G-GDPR for guidance related to DPIAs.

Data Protection

Per the UK-GDPR, the UK-DPAct, the G-GDPR, and GBR-89, the controller must comply with the following principles of the data protection legislation:

Lawfulness, fairness, and transparency
Purpose limitation
Data minimization
Accuracy
Storage limitation
Integrity and confidentiality (security)
Accountability
As stated in the UK-GDPR, the UK-DPAct, the G-GDPR, and GBR-89, it must be shown that each data processing activity has a lawful basis under UK legislation, in addition to the common law basis. For health and social care research, the lawful basis is determined by the data controller’s organization type:

For universities, National Health Service (NHS) organizations, Research Council institutes, or other public authority, the processing of personal data for research should be a “task in the public interest.”
For commercial companies and charitable research organizations, the processing of personal data for research should be undertaken within “legitimate interests.”
As explained in the DUAA-Org, the DUAA amends, but does not replace, the UK-GDPR and the UK-DPAct. (See DUAA-Sum for a summary of clarifications on changes to data protection law from the DUAA amendments.)

As described in the G-GDPR, with regard to transparency, the sponsor should understand whether personal data is collected indirectly from a third party or directly, as these determine the actions to take to comply with data protection requirements. In most cases, the sponsor will need to provide transparency information about the legal basis and other details of processing personal data. See the table in G-GDPR, which sets out the specific transparency requirements for personal data. Per GBR-53, to help ensure research participants have all the information they need to make an informed decision about the use of their data, sponsors are expected to use the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) template at GBR-53, which includes information on:

When you should use this GDPR wording
If you decide to use your own bespoke GDPR wording
If you want to update the GDPR wording in your open studies
Instructions for use
The GDPR transparency wording for all sponsors
Communicating GDPR information to children and young people
See the DUAA, the DUAA-Org, See DUAA-Sum for additional clarifications on data protection, including safeguards and restrictions when using automated decision-making. In addition, GBR-100 contains additional templates to help sponsors comply with the UK-GDPR.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

Per the UK-GDPR, UK-DPAct, and G-GDPR, consent to participate in research is not the same as consent as the legal basis for processing personal data under the data protection legislation. Per the G-GDPR, for the purposes of the UK-GDPR, the legal basis for processing data for health and social care research should not be consent. This means that requirements in the UK-GDPR relating to consent do not apply to health and care research. Per the G-GDPR, even though consent is not the legal basis for processing personal data for research, the common law duty of confidentiality still applies, so consent is still needed for people outside the care team to access and use confidential information for research.

As delineated in the UK-GDPR, the UK-DPAct, the G-GDPR, and GBR-89, participants have the right to be informed about the collection and use of their personal data. This is a key transparency requirement under the data protection legislation. The UK-GDPR specifies what data individuals have the right to be informed about (i.e., privacy information). In addition, as delineated in the UK-GDPR, the UK-DPAct, the G-GDPR, and GBR-89, the participant has certain data rights, which are limited by a range of exemptions. These exemptions must be balanced with what is fair to participants. As indicated in the G-GDPR, exemptions to data subject rights are not automatic, but must be considered on a study-by-study basis. It is important, therefore, to take into account the relevance of data rights to a particular study in the Participant Information Sheet (PIS) when offering or limiting the rights available to research participants. If data rights have been previously offered or limited to participants that are not appropriate under UK-GDPR, then the PIS may need to be revised as a non-substantial amendment.

As indicated in the G-GDPR and GBR-100, the HRA has developed a series of templates with transparency language to help organizations comply with the data protection legislation. The requirements vary depending on the point of collection of personal data (directly or indirectly) and the timing of the study. Also see GBR-129 for guidance from the UK Information Commissioner’s Office.

Per GBR-100, children must be provided with the same information as adults regarding what will be done with their personal data, even if consent is sought from the parent/legal guardian. The UK-GDPR states that information provided to individuals should be in a concise, transparent, intelligible, and easily accessible form, using clear and plain language.

The UKwide-Rsrch describes the following differences among the UK nations regarding accessing identifiable data without consent, including for potential participants:

England and Wales – If the project involves access to identifiable patient data relating to people living or receiving care and treatment in England and Wales without consent, the sponsor may need to apply to the HRA via the Confidentiality Advisory Group (CAG) (GBR-38). The CAG provides advice to the HRA on the use of confidential patient information for research uses. See GBR-41 for details and resources on the CAG.
Northern Ireland – There is currently no legal basis for those outside of the direct care team to process identifiable data without consent. The Health and Social Care Privacy Advisory Committee can provide advice on any options available in Northern Ireland. The Health and Social Care Honest Broker Service does not provide identifiable data for consented studies or trials but may be able to offer advice on options to access anonymized data to support research
Scotland – If a project is multi-center, a sponsor will need to obtain permissions through the Public Benefit and Privacy Panel for Health and Social Care. For single center studies, applicants should contact the Caldicott Guardian at the research site to discuss the requirements for accessing the data
UK-US Data Bridge

As explained in GBR-22, under the “UK Extension to the EU-US Data Privacy Framework” (GBR-23), businesses in the UK can transfer personal data to certified U.S. organizations without further safeguards as defined in the GBR-23. US organizations that have been certified can opt in to receive data from the UK through the UK-US data bridge. Per GBR-19, before transferring personal data, UK organizations must verify that the receiving US organization is certified pursuant to GBR-23. Sensitive personal data must be appropriately identified as sensitive when transferred under the UK-US data bridge to ensure it receives appropriate protections under the framework. Under the UK extension, sensitive personal information includes genetic data, biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying a natural person, and data concerning sexual orientation. See GBR-22, GBR-23, and GBR-19 for additional information about the UK Extension to the Data Privacy Framework.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile) 

The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 was signed into law in April 2025 and will come into force on April 28, 2026, after a 12-month implementation period. See HRA’s Guidance on changes to the clinical trials regulations and MHRA’s draft guidance to support sponsors in preparing for the implementation of the new regulations.

Obtaining Consent

In all United Kingdom (UK) clinical trials, a freely given informed consent must be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113). As per the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, and GBR-9, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by an ethics committee (EC) recognized by the United Kingdom Ethics Committee Authority (UKECA) (henceforth referred to as a “recognized EC”) and operating according to standard operating procedures (GBR-9) issued by England’s Health Research Authority (HRA).) Refer to GBR-18 and GBR-69 for more on informed consent in the UK.

The MHCTR and G-ConsentPIS, state that the investigator(s) must provide detailed research study information to the participant or legal representative/guardian. The MHCTR and G-ConsentPIS also specify that the oral and written information concerning the trial, including the ICF, should be easy to understand and presented without coercion or unduly influencing a potential participant to enroll in the clinical trial. The participant and the legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate. Per G-ConsentPIS, a signature on a consent form does not in itself make consent valid. A person’s agreement with each statement contained in the consent form can be indicated by initialing or ticking boxes, or by providing the answers ‘yes’ or ‘no’ after each statement. The form itself is then signed by the parties involved in the consent conversation. The Participant Information Sheet (PIS) supports the consent process to help ensure participants have been adequately informed. In addition, the PIS forms part of the transparency information that must be provided to participants under the data protection legislation for the use and processing of personal data. (See the Personal Data Protection section for more information on data protection requirements.) Testing the PIS with an appropriate group of people (patient groups or other members of the public) is strongly encouraged to ensure the language used is appropriate, the PIS format aids understanding, and the PIS covers risks and benefits that are relevant to potential participants. EC approval is not needed to test the PIS in this manner. For more guidance on the PIS, see the PrtInfoQty-Stds, the PrtInfo-DesignPrin, and GBR-14, which include FAQs, information principles, and standards.

Per GBR-31, the HRA guides researchers and ECs in taking a proportionate approach to seeking consent. A proportionate approach adopts procedures commensurate with the balance of risk and benefits so that potential participants are not overwhelmed by unnecessarily lengthy, complex, and inaccessible information sheets. Participants should be provided with succinct, relevant, truthful information in a user-friendly manner that promotes their autonomy. Specifically, the methods and procedures used to seek informed consent and the level of information provided should be proportionate to:

The nature and the complexity of the research
The risks, burdens, and potential benefits (to the participants and/or society)
The ethical issues at stake
Per GBR-113, none of the oral and written information concerning the clinical trial, including the written ICF, should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or to appear to waive any legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator, the institution, the sponsor, or their agents from liability for negligence.

Re-Consent

According to GBR-113, the EC should approve any change in the ICF due to a protocol modification before such changes are implemented. The participant or legal representative/guardian will also be required to re-sign the revised ICF and receive a copy of any amended documentation.

Per GBR-18, during a clinical trial, researchers should periodically reaffirm the willingness of participants to continue. If significant new information becomes available, participants should be reconsented using revised (and re-approved) consent documents so that their continued consent is confirmed.

Language Requirements

As stated in the MHCTR, applications to the EC and the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) and any accompanying material, such as the ICF content, should be presented in English.

Documenting Consent

The MHCTR states that the participant or legal representative/guardian, and the investigator(s) must sign and date the ICF. Where the participant is illiterate, or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, verbal consent should be obtained in the presence of and countersigned by an impartial witness. As provided in G-ConsentPIS, consent for clinical trials of investigational medicinal products must be in writing. Electronic methods for documenting consent, including the use of electronic signatures, are also considered to be in writing. A physical or electronic copy of the signed consent form will still need to be provided to the participant. To record consent electronically, electronic signatures will be needed. Because there are different forms and classifications of electronic signatures, the researcher should determine what is appropriate for the particular study. GBR-6 sets out the legal and ethical requirements for seeking and documenting consent using electronic methods (also known as eConsent in the UK), as well as expectations regarding the use of electronic signatures. eConsent enables potential research participants to be provided with the information they need to make a decision via a tablet, smartphone, or digital multimedia. It also enables their informed consent to be documented using electronic signatures. This approach can supplement the traditional paper-based approach or, where appropriate, replace it.

Waiver of Consent

No information is currently available.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Based on the MHCTR, the G-ConsentPIS, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study purpose, procedures, and duration
Study title and the study Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) ID are clearly displayed
Approximate number of participants involved in the trial
The participant’s responsibilities in participating in the trial
Trial treatment schedule and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
Experimental aspects of the study
Any foreseeable risks or discomforts to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
Any benefits or prorated payment to the participant or to others that may reasonably be expected from the research; if no benefit is expected, the participant should also be made aware of this
A disclosure of appropriate alternative procedures or treatments, and their potential benefits and risks
Compensation and/or medical treatment available to the participant in the event of a trial-related injury
Any additional costs to the participant that may result from participation in the research
That participation is voluntary, the participant may withdraw at any time, and refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits, or reduction in the level of care to which the participant is otherwise entitled
The extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained, and the possibility of record access by the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), the ethics committees (ECs), the auditor(s), and the monitor(s)
That the participant or legal representative/guardian will be notified if significant new findings developed during the study may affect the participant's willingness to continue
Individuals to contact for further information regarding the trial, the rights of trial participants, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator(s) may remove the participant without consent
Additional invasive tests or samples required for study purposes only
Consent to use of audio/videotaping, with possible use of verbatim quotation or use of photographs
Transfer of data/samples to countries outside of the European Economic Area (EEA) with less data protection
Agreement to receive individual feedback from testing
ICF examples and templates are provided in the G-ConsentPIS.

For more information about informed consent required elements, see GBR-18, GBR-113, GBR-100, GBR-31, and GBR-69.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, the G-ConsentPIS, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), the United Kingdom’s (UK’s) ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. The MHCTR states that a participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in the MHCTR, the G-ConsentPIS, and GBR-113, the participant or legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary, that they may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As delineated in the MHCTR, the G-ConsentPIS, and GBR-113, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

Also see GBR-117 for an interactive web-based communications toolkit to help researchers and participants keep in touch after participation in a research study.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per the MHCTR and GBR-113, the arrangements to protect participants’ privacy should be provided in the application to the ethics committee, and the ICF should inform potential participants of any potential risk to their confidentiality.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The MHCTR and GBR-113 state that the research participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, and GBR-113 state that a research participant’s rights, safety, and well-being must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
The MHCTR, the MHCTR2006-No2, the MHCTR-BSQ, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113) make provisions to protect the rights of a research participant during the informed consent process when a clinical trial of an investigational product (IP) is complicated by medical emergencies. As delineated in the G-ConsentPIS and GBR-18, in an emergency, if the signed informed consent form (ICF) cannot be obtained from the research participant, the consent of the legal representative/guardian should be obtained. If the prior consent of the participant or legal representative/guardian cannot be obtained, the participant’s enrollment should follow measures specified in the protocol, and the ethics committee (EC) must provide documented approval in order to protect the participant’s rights, safety, and well-being. The participant or legal representative/guardian should provide consent as soon as possible.

The MHCTR-BSQ amends the MHCTR and creates an exception for minors participating in a trial where urgent treatment is required and prior consent cannot be obtained. This situation also requires the EC to issue its approval beforehand.

The MHCTR2006-No2 amends the MHCTR and creates an exception to the general rule in England, Northern Ireland, and Wales that incapacitated adults cannot be included in a clinical trial under medical emergencies. If the treatment to be provided is a matter of urgency and obtaining prior consent is not possible, incapacitated adult participants may be included in the trial once EC approval has been obtained. In Scotland, the provisions of Section 51 of the AIA2000 govern the inclusion of adults lacking capacity in research.

The G-ConsentPIS states that the United Kingdom allows adults not able to consent for themselves to be recruited into clinical trials without prior consent in emergency situations if the following conditions exist:

Treatment needs to be given urgently
It is also necessary to take urgent action to administer the drug (IP) for the purposes of the trial
It is not reasonably practicable to obtain consent from a legal representative
The procedure is approved by an EC
Consent is sought from a legal representative as soon as possible
Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Overview

As per the MHCTR and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), in all United Kingdom (UK) clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process.

Per GBR-131, vulnerability may be defined in different ways and may arise as a result of being in an abusive relationship, vulnerability due to age, potential marginalization, disability, and due to disadvantageous power relationships within personal and professional roles. Participants may not be conventionally vulnerable but may be in a dependent relationship that means they can feel coerced or pressured into taking part.

As stated in GBR-131, researchers must assess potential vulnerability within the context of the research, in terms of potential consequences from their participation (immediate and long-term) or lack of positive impact where this is immediately needed or expected. Further, researchers should make the participants aware of the limits to confidentiality and decide whether verbal or written consent will be more appropriate and protective of the participants’ interests. In addition, researchers should consider the following:

Participants’ vulnerability
Potential negative consequences or lack of personal benefits from their involvement in research where these are expected
Providing appropriate information to elicit freely-given informed consent for participation as well as information regarding data deposit and data re-use (where deposit is possible)
Limits to confidentiality and occasions where this may occur
Legal requirements of working with the specific population
Incentives and compensation for participation
In addition, GBR-131 states that when working with participants who are considered vulnerable, researchers may find themselves in a position of increased responsibilities or expectations. Researchers should endeavor to assess the likelihood of additional ethics issues and develop strategies and a framework of clear responsibilities they can refer to should such issues arise. They should also use their research ethics committee as a resource for advice and guidance. Researchers should be able to justify the approach they take in dealing with unforeseen ethics issues and maintain the integrity of the research.

As per GBR-131, in cases where research involves potentially vulnerable groups, every effort should be made to secure freely given informed consent that participants have actively provided. Every effort should be made to ensure that they have the time and opportunity to access support in their decision-making, for example by discussing their choice with a trusted adult or relative. Passive assent, including group assent (with consent given by a gatekeeper) should be avoided wherever possible, and every effort should be made to develop methods of seeking consent that are appropriate to the groups studied, using expert advice, support, and training, where necessary. Vulnerability should be considered on a case-by-case basis; many groups or individuals not traditionally considered as vulnerable could be exposed to issues from participating in research that make them vulnerable. See GBR-131 for additional resources and case studies.

See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
According to the MHCTR and GBR-4, a minor in the United Kingdom (UK) is an individual under 16 years of age.

As set forth in the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, the G-ConsentPIS, GBR-4, GBR-9, and the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), when the research participant is a minor, informed consent should be obtained from a parent/legal guardian. As per GBR-4, the researcher needs only to obtain consent from one (1) person with parental responsibility. GBR-130 further indicates that the parent/legal guardian must not be connected with the conduct of the trial, is suitable to act by virtue of their relationship with the child/young person, and is available and willing to do so. A legal representative should only ever be approached if someone with parental responsibility cannot be contacted prior to the proposed inclusion of the child/young person due to the urgent nature of the treatment provided as part of the trial. In this situation, a professional legal representative (e.g., a doctor) can be responsible for the medical treatment of the child/young person if they are independent of the study, or a person nominated by the healthcare provider.

Additionally, GBR-130 states that researchers must ensure that the parent/legal guardian:

Understand that they are being asked to give consent on behalf of the child/young person
Understand the objectives, risks, and inconveniences of the trial and the conditions under which it is to be conducted
Have been informed of the right to withdraw the child/young person from the trial at any time
Have a contact point where further information about the trial can be obtained
The MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, and GBR-4, state that a study may only be conducted on minors if several conditions are fulfilled including:

An ethics committee (EC), following consultation with pediatric experts, has endorsed the protocol
The parent/guardian has had an interview with the investigator(s) to understand the trial objectives and risks, been provided with a point of contact for further information, and been informed of the right to withdraw the minor from the trial at any time
No incentives or financial inducements are given to the minor or the parent/guardian except in the event of trial-related injury or loss
The trial relates directly to a condition from which the minor suffers, or is of such a nature that it can only be carried out on minors
The participant(s) will derive some direct benefit from their participation in the trial
The trial is necessary to validate data obtained in other trials involving persons able to give informed consent, or by other research methods
The trial has been designed to minimize pain, discomfort, fear, and any other foreseeable risk in relation to the disease and the minor’s stage of development
GBR-4 provides additional best practices:

Children and their parents (or those with parental responsibility) should be involved in the decision-making process around consent to take part in research, regardless of whether the child or young person is legally competent to give consent. This includes involving children or young people who are not considered competent to give consent.
Assent should be sought from a child who is not considered competent as long as this is practicable and the child is not too young.
In some situations, a young person who is competent may object to the involvement of their parents and their confidentiality should be respected.
Before giving consent, children and young people should be provided with age-appropriate information that enables them to understand participation in research. Information may be provided using a layered or staged approach so that it is more easily understood.
Children and young people should be given the opportunity to ask questions and to get support in their decision-making, such as talking to a trusted adult.
Good records should be kept of any discussions about consent and of the final decision.
Inducements and coercion must be avoided.
Seeking consent is a process and it is good practice to engage regularly with the child and family over the course of research to confirm they are willing to continue. In studies in which children who are not competent will become competent during the study period, then consent from young people should be sought as soon as possible after competency is reached. A decision about how this will be managed should be made at the start of the study and included in the protocol.
See the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, GBR-4, and GBR-9 for detailed requirements. The G-ConsentPIS provides style guidance and suggestions for presenting age-appropriate information in the participant information sheet.

Assent Requirements

As indicated in GBR-4, whenever practical and appropriate, a child's assent should be sought before including them in research. Even when a child or young person is competent, it is still normally good practice to involve the family in the decision-making process; however, if the young person objects, researchers should respect their privacy.

As per GBR-4, for clinical trials of investigational products (IPs), it is usually inappropriate to ask very young children (e.g., under five (5) years old) to sign an assent form; however, their views should be considered. Researchers must make an informed judgment to determine when seeking assent is appropriate; the age of a child can only be taken as a guide. The child's developmental stage, knowledge of illness, and experience of health care should also be considered. Although there is a danger that children can be asked to exercise greater autonomy than normal, this must be balanced with the potential loss of trust associated with denying their assent. Such judgment needs a framework of considerations for analysis, a record of observations, and discussions and a documented decision. In circumstances where seeking assent at the outset is not appropriate, the researcher could provide the child with information as and when required.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
The G-ConsentPIS states that researchers must give a clear warning to potential participants when there is a risk of harm to an unborn child and/or risk when breastfeeding. The Participant Information Sheet (PIS) should provide specific advice to potential participants about the risks of becoming pregnant, of fathering a child, or of breastfeeding while taking part in the research including the need for pregnancy testing, contraceptive requirements, and how to report a pregnancy during the study. The PIS should also provide information about what will happen if a participant becomes pregnant, including whether and how the researcher will monitor the pregnancy. This would include access to the mother's and/or child's notes, and any possible follow up of the child including post-natal examinations. For men, researchers must provide clear warnings and advice if the research treatment could damage sperm and consequently pose a risk to possible pregnancies. Specific advice for pregnant partners may be needed, including information on any compensation arrangements.

Further, the G-ConsentPIS finds that the risk of harm caused during pregnancy is most likely when recruiting young people to a clinical trial for an investigational medicinal product (CTIMP). In this case, there should be consent from someone over the age of 16, and the following should be done:

Discuss the risk of pregnancy, pregnancy testing, and the use of appropriate contraception with their parents (or their legal guardian) during the consent process and with young potential participants as part of the assent process
Consider local social beliefs
Involve pediatricians and the ethics committee in preliminary discussions if this is a concern
Consult young people when designing consent and writing information
Respect the young person's autonomy but encourage involvement of the parents
Be aware that in CTIMPs, it is the parents of children under 16 who legally provide consent, and this will include consent to pregnancy testing and discussion of contraception
Information needs to go beyond "We will do a pregnancy test…" to include what will happen in broad terms
In accordance with the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), informed consent requirements for conducting clinical trials with pregnant or nursing women or fetuses follow the general requirements listed in the Required Elements section. Specifically, the informed consent form should include a statement on the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Per the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), prisoners are considered vulnerable because incarceration could affect their ability to make a voluntary decision regarding participation in research. A research study involving prisoners should ensure that these prospective participants are informed and are given the opportunity to make their own decisions without any interference from a higher authority. The ethics committee (EC) must also ensure that the study will be independently monitored to assure the dignity and rights of the prisoners involved in the research. GBR-9 indicates that research involving prisoners or conducted within the prison services of the United Kingdom are normally reviewed by a flagged EC in England and Wales if conducted in England and Wales, and any EC in Scotland or Northern Ireland if being conducted in Scotland and Northern Ireland.

Per the UKwide-Rsrch, a prisoner or young offender is defined as any inmate of the prison systems of England and Wales, Scotland, or Northern Ireland. It does not include patients detained under the MHAct at special hospitals or other psychiatric secure units, or juvenile offenders detained in local authority secure accommodation or secure training centers. Health research involving prisoners or young offenders should relate directly to their health care and be of such a nature that it could only be conducted in this population. See the UKwide-Rsrch for details on differences between the four (4) United Kingdom nations with regard to research on prisoners.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
As per the MHCTR and GBR-9, a recognized ethics committee (EC) within the Health Research Authority (HRA), must approve the participation of adult research participants who are incapable by reason of physical and mental capacity to give consent, and must obtain advice from professionals with expertise in handling this population.

The MHCTR and the G-ConsentPIS, specify that when a study involves adult participants with mental incapacities, informed consent should be obtained from the legal representative/guardian. This consent should only be provided once the legal representative/guardian has had an interview with the investigator(s) to understand the trial objectives and risks, been provided with a point of contact for further information, and been informed of the right to withdraw the participant from the trial at any time. The G-ConsentPIS provides additional country-specific information on legal representative requirements.

As delineated in the MHCTR, a clinical trial of an investigational product may involve participants with mental incapacities under the following conditions:

The participant has received information according to the participant’s capacity of understanding regarding the trial, its risks, and its benefits
No incentives or financial inducements are given to the participant or legal representative/guardian except in the event of trial-related injury or loss
The trial relates directly to a condition from which the participant suffers, or is of such a nature that it can only be carried out on participants with mental incapacities
The participant(s) will derive some direct benefit from their participation in the trial, or produce no risk at all
The trial is necessary to validate data obtained in other trials involving persons able to give informed consent, or by other research methods
The trial has been designed to minimize pain, discomfort, fear, and any other foreseeable risk in relation to the disease and the participant’s stage of development
See the MHCTR, G-ConsentPIS, and GBR-3 for detailed requirements.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
New Info (Not Yet in Profile) 

The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 was signed into law in April 2025 and will come into force on April 28, 2026, after a 12-month implementation period. See HRA’s Guidance on changes to the clinical trials regulations and MHRA’s draft guidance to support sponsors in preparing for the implementation of the new regulations.

As delineated in the MHCTR, the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), and GBR-9, an investigational product (IP), referred to as an investigational medicinal product (IMP) in the United Kingdom (UK), is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active substance or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial. This includes a product with a marketing authorization when it is used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a different way from the approved form; when used for an unapproved indication; or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
According to the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, the G-CTApp, and the G-GMP-GDP, the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) (known as investigational medicinal products (IMPs) in the United Kingdom (UK)) to be used in a trial. A Manufacturer’s Authorization for Investigational Medicinal Products (MIA(IMP)) must be obtained by the person responsible for the manufacture of any IP to be used in the trial. The sponsor or the designated representative must include a copy of the MIA(IMP) in the clinical trial application submission to the MHRA. The applicant must complete the form listed in GBR-28 to obtain an MIA(IMP) from the MHRA. The MHCTR defines “manufacturing authorization” to include importing and assembly authorizations, as applicable. The G-CTApp states that if an IP is manufactured outside the European Union (EU), the clinical trial application should include an MIA(IMP), importer authorization, and qualified person (QP) declaration on good manufacturing practice (GMP) for each site. The MHRA will approve the manufacture or import of an IP after the clinical trial application has been approved.

Per G-ATMP, a manufacturer’s license from MHRA is needed to manufacture unlicensed advanced therapy medicinal products (ATMPs) in the UK. See G-ATMP for guidance on the two (2) ATMP manufacturer license pathways: the hospital exemption or the “specials” scheme.

As per the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, the G-GMP-GDP, and GBR-15, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), the MIA(IMP) holder must also comply with the GMP guidelines and provide an IMP Certificate of Analysis. In addition, the MHCTR and the MHCTR2006 specify that the holder of an MIA(IMP) must always have the services of at least one (1) QP at their disposal. The QP must satisfy the qualification and experience requirements delineated in the aforementioned sources. The QP’s primary legal responsibility is to certify batches of IPs prior to use in a clinical trial, or prior to release for sale and placement in the market. See Part 6 and Schedule 6 of the MHCTR for detailed applicant requirements.

In accordance with the G-ImportIMPs, IPs that have been QP-certified in countries on the list of approved countries (initially, EU and European Economic Area (EEA) countries per G-CTApprovedCountries) do not need to be re-certified when importing to the UK. However, the sponsor must require the MIA(IMP) holder to put in place an assurance system to check these IMPs have been certified by a QP in a listed country before release to the trial. A sponsor may perform verification of QP certification in a listed country themselves if they are the holder of a UK MIA(IMP). Alternatively, they may outsource this verification to a third party who holds a UK MIA(IMP). IPs coming to Great Britain from Northern Ireland do not require this additional oversight. Further, QP-certified IPs supplied from the EU/EEA for use at Northern Ireland clinical trial sites and then onward supplied to Great Britain also do not require the additional oversight. IPs coming directly to the UK from third-party countries that are not on the list of approved countries will continue to require import and QP certification in the UK by the MIA(IMP) holder as per the existing requirements. See the G-ImportIMPsAuth, for additional details on the authorizations and procedures.

The G-IPsNIreland delineates that the supply and use of IPs in Northern Ireland must follow EU laws as per the Northern Ireland Protocol. For policy papers and details on the Northern Ireland Protocol, see GBR-119.

Per the G-SubtlAmndmt, for any change to IP manufacturing, importation, or certification relevant to the supply of IPs in an ongoing UK trial, a substantial amendment must be submitted to the MHRA. However, if the sponsor chooses to retain an existing UK release site for the ongoing UK trial but includes an additional EU/EEA site for trials in the EU/EEA only, then no substantial amendment to the MHRA will be required.

Please note: The UK is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (GBR-5), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see GBR-48.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

In accordance with the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, and GBR-92, the sponsor or the designated representative is responsible for providing investigators with an Investigator’s Brochure (IB), which must contain all of the relevant information on the investigational product(s) (IPs) (known as investigational medicinal products (IMPs) in the United Kingdom (UK)) obtained through the earlier research phases, including preclinical, toxicological, safety, efficacy, and adverse events data. The sponsor or the designated representative should also update the IB as significant new information becomes available.

As specified in the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), the IB must provide coverage of the following areas:

Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation parameters
Non-clinical studies (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and metabolism profiles)
Effects of IPs in humans (pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and pharmacodynamics; safety and efficacy; regulatory and post marketing experiences)
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator(s)
Bibliography
See Section 7 of GBR-113 for detailed content guidelines.

Quality Management

Per GBR-113, the sponsor must maintain a Certificate of Analysis to document the identity, purity, and strength of the IP(s) to be used in the clinical trial.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Labeling for investigational products (IPs) (known as investigational medicinal products (IMPs) in the United Kingdom (UK)) must comply with the requirements set forth in the MHCTR, the MHCTR2006, GBR-15, and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113). As specified in GBR-15, for an IP to be used in a clinical trial, it must be properly labeled in the official language of the country where the trial is being conducted.

As set forth in GBR-15, the following labeling information must be included on the primary package label (or any intermediate packaging), and the outer packaging:

Name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor, contract research organization (CRO), or investigator
Pharmaceutical dosage form, route of administration, quantity of dosage units, and in the case of open trials, the name/identifier and strength/concentration
Batch and/or code number to identify the contents and packaging operation
Trial reference code allowing identification of the trial, site, investigator, and sponsor (if not given elsewhere)
Trial participant identification number/treatment number and where relevant, the visit number
Investigator name (if not already included above)
Instructions for use (reference may be made to a leaflet or other explanatory document intended for the trial participant or person administering the product)
“For clinical trial use only” or similar wording indicating the IP is clinical trial material
Storage conditions
Expiration date (use by date, expiration date, or re-test date as applicable), in month/year format and in a manner that avoids any ambiguity
“Keep Out of Reach of Children” except when the product is not going to be taken home by participants
As per the MHCTR, a sample of the labeling is required as part of the clinical trial application submission. (See the Submission Content section for detailed clinical trial application submission requirements). Furthermore, according to GBR-15, the IP must also be suitably packaged in a manner that will prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

As defined in the MHCTR and the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (GBR-113), the sponsor must supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the investigational product(s) (IPs) (known as investigational medicinal products (IMPs) in the United Kingdom (UK)), including the comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable. The sponsor should not supply either party with the IP(s) until obtaining Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) approval and a favorable opinion from a recognized ethics committee (EC).

Per the MHCTR and GBR-113, the sponsor must ensure the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

IP product quality and stability over the period of use
IP manufactured according to good manufacturing practice guidance (G-GMP-GDP and the European Union’s Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) (GBR-15) which is cited as a resource to consult in G-GMP-GDP)
Proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP(s)
IP use record including information on the quantity, loading, shipment, receipt, dispensing, handling, reclamation, and destruction of the unused IP
Acceptable storage temperatures, conditions, and times for the IP
Written procedures including instructions for handling and storage of the IP, adequate and safe receipt, dispensing, retrieval of unused IP(s), and return of unused IP(s) to the sponsor
Timely delivery of the IP(s)
Establishment of management and filing systems for the IPs
Sufficient quantities of the IP for the trial
As delineated in GBR-15, IPs should remain under the control of the sponsor until after completion of a two-step procedure: certification by the Qualified Person (QP) and release by the sponsor for use in a clinical trial. Both steps should be recorded and retained in the relevant trial files held by or on behalf of the sponsor. Shipping of IPs should be conducted according to instructions given by or on behalf of the sponsor in the shipping order. De-coding arrangements should be available to the appropriate responsible personnel before IPs are shipped to the investigator site. A detailed inventory of the shipments made by the manufacturer or importer should be maintained and include the addressees’ identification.

Refer to the MHCTR and GBR-113 for detailed, sponsor-related IP requirements.

To help ensure the continuity of supply of medicines for clinical trials from January 1, 2021, the BrexitLtr-IPs indicates that the UK will unilaterally recognize certain European Union (EU) regulatory processes for a time-limited period. This recognition is known as “standstill.”

Record Requirements

As per GBR-113, the sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and institution(s) in writing of the need for record retention and should notify the investigator(s) and institution(s) in writing when the trial-related pharmacy records are no longer needed. Additionally, the sponsor must ensure sufficient quantities of the IP(s) used in the trial to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary, and should maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics.

As set forth in GBR-113, sponsor-specific essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after the last approval of a marketing application, until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications, or at least two (2) years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of the IP’s clinical development. The sponsor should inform the investigator(s) and the institution(s) in writing when trial-related records are no longer needed.

However, per the MHCTR2006, the sponsor and the chief investigator must ensure that the documents contained in the trial master file are retained for at least five (5) years following the trial’s completion. The documents must be readily available to the MHRA upon request and be complete and legible. The sponsor should ensure that trial participant medical files are also retained for at least five (5) years after the trial’s conclusion.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
The term “specimen” is not referenced within the United Kingdom (UK). However, the following terms are used relating to specimens:

Relevant material: As per the UK-HTA, Code-E, GBR-73, and GBR-76, “relevant material” or “human tissue” is any material from a human body, other than gametes, that consists of, or includes, cells. This also includes blood (except where held for transplantation). Hair and nails from living persons are specifically excluded from this definition, as are gametes and embryos outside the body.
Bodily material: UK-HTA and GBR-64 defines “bodily material” as material from a human body that consists of, or includes, human cells. Unlike relevant material, this includes gametes, embryos outside the human body, and hair and nails from the body.
Tissue: GBR-64 defines “tissue” as any human material (e.g., blood, biopsies, urine) and includes relevant and bodily material.
Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
Import/Export

As specified in the UK-HTA, the Human Tissue Authority (HTA) has jurisdiction regarding the import and export of specimens (known as “relevant materials” or “human tissue” in the United Kingdom (UK)) and complies with the Code of Practice on import and export set forth in Code-E. According to the UK-HTA, Code-E, GBR-56, GBR-73, and GBR-52, the import and export of relevant material/human tissue is not in itself a licensable activity under the UK-HTA. However, once the material is imported, storage of this material may be licensable unless it is for a specific research project with ethical approval from an ethics committee (EC). GBR-73 explains that it is preferable for imported human tissue to be stored in a licensed establishment where possible, and if so, there is no requirement for EC approval to undertake research. However, if the premises where the human tissue will be held are not covered by an HTA license, each research project using the human tissue will require EC approval.

If relevant material/human tissue is being imported or exported for an application, the HTRegs specify that this must be carried out under the authority of a license or third-party agreement with an establishment licensed by the HTA to store material for human application. See G-Tissues-Brexit for guidance on Brexit-related regulatory changes that apply to the movement of human tissues and cells between Great Britain, Northern Ireland, and Europe. Establishments importing or exporting human tissues and cells intended for human application may require an HTA license covering these activities. For additional help, clinical trial staff should contact the HTA at enquiries@hta.gov.uk. For more information about Brexit, see the Scope of Assessment section.

Code-E requires imported and exported material to be procured, used, handled, stored, transported, and disposed of in accordance with the donor’s consent. In addition, due regard should be given to safety considerations, and with the dignity and respect accorded to human bodies, body parts, and tissue as delineated in Code-E. Any individual or organization wishing to import human bodies, body parts, and tissue into England, Wales, or Northern Ireland must comply with the guidelines set forth in Code-E. For exports, donors should be provided with adequate information upon providing consent, so that their samples may be transported as exported samples for use abroad. It is the responsibility of the recipient country to ensure that, prior to export, the material is handled appropriately and that the required country standards have been met.

In addition, the G-QualityBlood lists the quality and safety standards when importing or exporting blood into or from the EU/European Economic Area (EEA). The UK maintains the existing quality and safety standards for the collection, testing, processing, storage, and distribution of human blood and blood components. The Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) should be consulted before importing or exporting blood or blood components. See the G-QualityBlood for relevant EU quality and safety directives.

Human Tissues, Cells, and Blood as Starting Material

Per G-ATMP, if tissues and cells are being used as starting materials in a medicinal product, the donation, procurement, and testing of the cells are covered by the HTRegs under the authority of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) for the use of gametes and embryos, which may be used in the derivation (development) of cells in the manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products (ATMPs), and under HTA for the licensing and inspection for all other tissues and cells. Once the starting materials have been made available, medicines legislation applies to and is regulated by the MHRA.

Per G-ATMP, the HTA and the MHRA have agreed that the collection of blood as a starting material for an ATMP can be carried out under either a tissues and cells license or a blood establishment license.

Material Transfer Agreement

Per GBR-107, UK’s model material transfer agreement (mMTA) (GBR-79) should be used, without modification, by commercial or non-commercial research sponsors to contract National Health Service/Health and Social Care organizations in any UK nation, whose only role in a research study is the provision of human biological material to the sponsor or sponsor’s agent. mMTA is not intended for non-study-specific transfer of material between tissue collection centers and research tissue banks or biorepositories. Transfers of material to help determine the research care pathway should be regarded as urgent and primarily for care purposes.

Other Considerations

As set forth in the UK-HTA, the HTRegs, and GBR-9, the HTA also regulates the storage and use of specimens from the living, and the removal, storage, use, and licensing of relevant materials/human tissue from the deceased for specified health-related purposes in the UK. The UK-HTA refers to specified purposes as “scheduled purposes.”

Note that per GBR-9 and GBR-105, an HTA license is not needed for the storage of specimens for certain research projects that have been approved by an ethics committee (EC). The HTA and the UK Health Departments’ Research Ethics Service (RES) (GBR-62) have agreed that an EC can give generic ethical approval for a research tissue bank’s arrangements for collection, storage, and release of specimens, provided the specimens in the bank are stored on HTA-licensed premises. This approval can extend to specific projects receiving non-identifiable tissue from the bank. The specimens do not then need to be stored on HTA-licensed premises, nor do they need project-specific ethical approval. However, a license is required for specimens stored for which there is no ethical approval (e.g., in large biobanks). The CTIMP-Condtns states that a favorable ethical opinion provides legal authority to hold relevant material for research on premises that are not licensed by the HTA (in England, Northern Ireland, and Wales only – this requirement does not apply in Scotland). Where a favorable ethical opinion provides this legal authority, relevant material can be held under the terms of the ethical opinion until the end of the period declared in the application; and approved by the EC. Samples may be held after the end-of-study date has been reached, for verification or quality checking of the research data. This should be detailed in the EC-approved protocol and should be for a defined period (and no longer than 12 months). After this period, legal authority to hold any relevant material for a project on premises that are not licensed by the HTA will expire (in England, Northern Ireland, and Wales only - this requirement does not apply in Scotland). To ensure that any continued storage of relevant material for a project is lawful (in England, Northern Ireland, or Wales), either the tissue must be held on premises with a storage license from HTA, or an application made for ethical review of another project before the favorable ethical opinion of the existing project expires. Otherwise, the tissue would need to be destroyed in accordance with Code-E.

Per the UK-HTA, the G-QAHumTissue, and Code-E, the scope of the UK-HTA provisions specifically cover England, Northern Ireland, and Wales. The UK-HTA licensing requirements do not apply in Scotland, with the exception of those provisions relating to the use of DNA. Scotland complies with the Scotland-AnatAct and the Scotland-HTA for the removal, retention, use, licensing, and import of human organs, tissue, and tissue samples specifically removed post mortem, and subsequently used for research. Per GBR-52, the Scotland-HTA does not regulate the use of tissue from the living for research.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: July 10, 2025
In accordance with the UK-HTA, Code-A, GBR-59, and GBR-9, prior to collecting, storing, or using a research participant’s specimens (known as relevant material/human tissue in the United Kingdom (UK)), consent from the participant or legal representative and ethics committee (EC) approval must be obtained. The scope of the UK-HTA provisions specifically cover England, Northern Ireland, and Wales. The UK-HTA licensing requirements do not apply in Scotland, with the exception of those provisions relating to the use of DNA. Scotland complies with the Scotland-AnatAct and the Scotland-HTA for the removal, retention, use, licensing, and import of human organs, tissue, and tissue samples specifically removed post mortem, and subsequently used for research.

Per G-ConsentPIS, the Participant Information Sheet (PIS) supports the consent process to help ensure participants have been adequately informed. In addition, the PIS forms part of the transparency information that must be provided to participants under the data protection legislation for the use and processing of personal data. As delineated in the UK-GDPR and UK-DPAct, personal data includes genetic data and biological samples. G-GDPR indicates that for the purposes of the UK-GDPR, the legal basis for processing data for health and social care research should not be consent. This means that requirements in UK-GDPR relating to consent do not apply to health and care research, and therefore, do not change the consent requirements to participate in a clinical trial and remove human tissue samples. For more information about the sponsor and investigator’s responsibilities to comply with the data protection requirements (e.g., transparency, safeguards, and data rights), see the Sponsorship topic.

Human Genetic Research Consent Requirements

As set forth in the UK-HTA and GBR-9, the UK-HTA considers it a UK-wide offense to have relevant material/human tissue with the intention of conducting a DNA analysis or using the results of this analysis without “qualifying consent” from a participant or legal representative, unless the information is being used for an “excepted purpose.” The UK-HTA states that “qualifying consent” is consent required in relation to the analysis of DNA manufactured by the human body. An “excepted purpose” is defined as the following:

Medical diagnosis/treatment
Coroner purposes
Crime prevention/detection
Prosecution
National security
Court/tribunal order
An existing holding to be used for research
In addition to participant consent, EC approval is required for the analysis of DNA in material from the living, where the research is not within the terms of consent for research from the person whose body manufactured the DNA. Please refer to the UK-HTA, GBR-9, and GBR-75 for detailed DNA analysis consent requirements.

Donor Consent Requirements

In accordance with the UK-HTA, Code-A, and GBR-9, prior to removing, storing, or using any living or deceased person’s organs, tissues, or cells for the purpose of research in connection with disorders in, or the functioning of the human body, investigators must obtain “appropriate consent” from the trial participants or their legal representative as well as EC approval. The UK-HTA and Code-A define “appropriate consent” in terms of the person who may give consent. This person may be either the trial participant, the legal representative (referred to as “nominated representative” in the UK-HTA), or, in the absence of either of these, the consent of a person in a “qualifying relationship” with the participant immediately prior to death.

As indicated in the UK-HTA and Code-A, in the case of a living child donor, “appropriate consent” must be obtained from the child’s parent/legal guardian. If the child has died, the written consent must have been obtained from the child’s parent/legal guardian prior to the child’s death in the presence of at least one (1) witness, or it must be signed at the direction of the child concerned by the parent/legal guardian, in the child’s presence, and in the presence of at least one (1) witness.

As indicated in the UK-HTA and Code-A, in the case of an adult donor 18 years or older, consent must be obtained prior to removing any bodily materials. If the adult has died, the written consent is only valid when it is signed by the person prior to death in the presence of at least one (1) witness at their direction, or it is contained in the person’s will. An adult donor may also appoint one (1) or more people (“nominated representative(s)”) to consent on their behalf in the event of death. This consent may be obtained orally or in writing. If the deceased donor has neither provided consent nor an appointed or nominated representative, appropriate consent may be given by someone in a “qualifying relationship” with the donor immediately prior to death. Refer to the UK-HTA and Code-A to obtain a complete list of relatives in hierarchical order who may qualify to provide this consent.

In the case of obtaining materials from an adult donor who lacks the capacity to consent, and neither a decision to consent or not consent is in force, the UK-HTA, the MCA2005, and GBR-9, state that approval by an EC is required. In addition, a living person’s organs, tissues, or cells may be stored and used without consent if the investigator is unable to identify the individual and it is being used for an EC-approved research project. Please refer to the UK-HTA and Code-A for detailed consent requirements.

Per GBR-59, the legal exemptions to consent for research with relevant material are as follows:

The relevant material is an existing holding held prior to September 1, 2006
The relevant material is imported
The relevant material is from a living person when the sample was taken, is non-identifiable, and will be used in research with/pending project-specific EC approval
The relevant material is from a person who died more than 100 years ago
See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent.

Requirements
(Legislation) Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 (AIA2000) (Current through July 9, 2025)
Scottish Parliament, Scotland
(Legislation) Anatomy Act 1984 (Scotland-AnatAct) (Current through July 10, 2025)
UK Parliament
(Legislation) Data (Use and Access) Act 2025 (DUAA) (Enacted June 19, 2025)
UK Parliament
(Legislation) Data Protection Act 2018 (UK-DPAct) (Current through July 8, 2025)
UK Parliament
(Legislation) Human Tissue (Scotland) Act 2006 (Scotland-HTA) (2006)
Scottish Parliament
(Legislation) Human Tissue Act 2004 (UK-HTA) (Current through July 9, 2025)
UK Parliament
(Legislation) Medicines and Medical Devices Act 2021 (MMDAct) (February 11, 2021)
UK Parliament
(Legislation) Mental Capacity Act 2005 (Chapter 9) (MCA2005) (Current through July 9, 2025)
UK Parliament
(Legislation) Mental Health Act 1983 (MHAct) (Current through July 10, 2025)
UK Parliament
(Regulation) The Good Laboratory Practice Regulations 1999 (S.I. 1999/3106) (UK-GLPs) (December 14, 1999)
UK Parliament
(Regulation) The Human Tissue (Quality and Safety for Human Application) Regulations 2007 (S.I. 2007/1523) (HTRegs) (Effective July 5, 2007)
UK Parliament
(Regulation) The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) (Amendment) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019 (No. 744) (MHCTR-EUExit) (Effective January 1, 2021)
Department of Health and Social Care
(Regulation) The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) (Amendment) Regulations 2024 (MHCTR2024) (Effective April 10, 2026)
UK Parliament
(Regulation) The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) Amendment (No.2) Regulations 2006 (S.I. 2006/2984) (MHCTR2006-No2) (Effective December 12, 2006)
Department of Health and Social Care
(Regulation) The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) Amendment Regulations 2006 (S.I. 2006/1928) (MHCTR2006) (Effective August 29, 2006)
Department of Health and Social Care
(Regulation) The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) and Blood Safety and Quality (Amendment) Regulations 2008 (S.I. 2008/941) (MHCTR-BSQ) (Effective May 1, 2008)
Department of Health and Social Care
(Regulation) The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) Regulations 2004 (S.I. 2004/1031) (MHCTR) (Current through July 10, 2025)
Department of Health and Social Care
(Regulation) UK General Data Protection Regulation (UK-GDPR) (Current through July 6, 2025)
UK Parliament
(Guidance) Access to Electronic Health Records by Sponsor Representatives in Clinical Trials (G-EHRAccess) (Last Updated September 8, 2021)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products: Regulation and Licensing in Great Britain (G-ATMP) (Last Updated March 6, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Authorizations and Procedures Required for Importing Investigational Medicinal Products to Great Britain from Approved Countries (G-ImportIMPsAuth) (Last Updated February 12, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Clinical Trials for Medicines: Apply for Authorisation in the UK (G-CTApp) (Last Updated November 13, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Clinical Trials for Medicines: Manage Your Authorisation, Report Safety Issues (G-CTAuth-GBR) (Last Updated June 9, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Code A: Guiding Principles and the Fundamental Principle of Consent (Code-A) (May 20, 2020)
Human Tissue Authority
(Guidance) Code E: Research - Code of Practice and Standards (Code-E) (April 3, 2017)
Human Tissue Authority
(Guidance) Common Issues Identified During Clinical Trial Applications (CTapp-Issues) (Last Updated November 6, 2023)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Completed Pediatric Studies - Submission, Processing, and Assessment (G-PIPs) (Last Updated February 13, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Consent and Participant Information Guidance (G-ConsentPIS) (Version 12) (June 2024)
Medical Research Council, Health Research Authority
(Guidance) CTIMP Standard Conditions (CTIMP-Condtns) (Last Updated July 29, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Guidance) GDPR Guidance for Researchers and Study Coordinators (G-GDPR) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Guidance) Good Manufacturing Practice and Good Distribution Practice (G-GMP-GDP) (Last Updated May 13, 2024)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Governance Arrangements for Research Ethics Committees: 2020 Edition (GAfREC) (Version 2.1) (July 20, 2021)
UK Health Departments
(Guidance) Guidance for the Notification of Serious Breaches of GCP or the Trial Protocol (G-MHRA-SeriousBreaches) (Version 6) (July 8, 2020)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Guidance on Changes to the Clinical Trials Regulations (MHCTR-Chgs) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Guidance) Guidance on Substantial Amendments to a Clinical Trial (G-SubtlAmndmt) (December 31, 2020)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Guidance on the Licensing of Biosimilar Products (G-Biosimilars) (Last Updated February 27, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Guideline on How to Increase Transparency when Presenting Safety Information in the Development Safety Update Report (DSUR): Region-specific Requirements for Canada and the United Kingdom (DSUR-UK_Canada) (July 6, 2021)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) HTA Guide to Quality and Safety Assurance for Human Tissues and Cells for Patient Treatment (G-QAHumTissue) (January 2021)
Human Tissue Authority
(Guidance) Importing Investigational Medicinal Products into Great Britain from Approved Countries (G-ImportIMPs) (Last Updated February 12, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) List of Approved Countries for Clinical Trials and Investigational Medicinal Products (G-CTApprovedCountries) (Last Updated February 12, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Make a Payment to MHRA (G-MHRAPaymt) (Last Updated September 2, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) More Information about the MHRA (MHRA-More) (January 16, 2023)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Oversight and Monitoring of Investigational Medical Product Trials (G-Ovrsight) (January 28, 2022)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Participant Information Design and Review Principles (PrtInfo-DesignPrin) (Last Updated August 21, 2023)
Health Research Authority
(Guidance) Procedures for UK Paediatric Investigation Plan (PIPs) (G-PIPsProcess) (Last Updated December 31, 2024)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Quality and Safety of Human Blood and Blood Products (G-QualityBlood) (Last Updated May 27, 2021)
Department of Health and Social Care
(Guidance) Register to Make Submissions to the MHRA (G-MHRASubmiss) (Last Updated May 4, 2021)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency, Department of Health and Social Care
(Guidance) Risk-Adapted Approach to Clinical Trials and Risk Assessments (G-RiskAssmt) (January 28, 2022)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Statutory Guidance: Current MHRA Fees (G-MHRAFees) (Effective April 1, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) Step-by-step Guide to Using IRAS for Combined Review (G-IRASCombRev) (Last Updated September 16, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Guidance) Supplying Investigational Medicinal Products to Northern Ireland (G-IPsNIreland) (Last Updated December 22, 2021)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Guidance) The Data Use and Access Act 2025 (DUAA) - Summary of the Changes to Data Protection Law (DUAA-Sum) (June 19, 2025)
Information Commissioner’s Office
(Guidance) The Data Use and Access Act 2025 (DUAA) - What Does It Mean for Organisations? (DUAA-Org) (June 19, 2025)
Information Commissioner’s Office
(Guidance) UK Transition Guidance (G-Tissues-Brexit) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Human Tissue Authority
(Correspondence) Letter to Medicines and Medical Product Suppliers: 17 November 2020 (BrexitLtr-IPs) (Last Updated December 28, 2020)
Department of Health and Social Care
(Standards) Participant Information Quality Standards (PrtInfoQty-Stds) (Last Updated November 6, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Toolkit) Carrying Out Research Across Borders (UKwide-Rsrch) (Date Unavailable)
Health Research Authority, NHS Research Scotland, Health and Social Care Northern Ireland, and Health and Care Research Wales
Additional Resources
(Document) Applying a Proportionate Approach to the Process of Seeking Consent (GBR-31) (Version 1.02) (May 3, 2018)
Health Research Authority
(Document) Clinical Trials Best Practice Guide 2024 (GBR-10) (December 13, 2023)
Association for the British Pharmaceutical Industry, UK Research & Development (UKRD), and The Shelford Group
(Document) Clinical Trials Facilitation Group (CTFG) Q&A document – Reference Safety Information (GBR-30) (November 2017)
Heads of Medicines Agencies (in cooperation with the European Medicines Agency and the European Commission)
(Document) EudraCT & EU CTR Frequently Asked Questions (GBR-16) (Version 2.5) (January 31, 2025)
European Medicines Agency
(Document) Explanatory Memorandum to the Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) (Amendment) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019 (No. 744) (GBR-115) (2019)
Department of Health and Social Care
(Document) Factsheet for UK Organisations on the UK-US Data Bridge (GBR-22) (2023)
Department for Science, Innovation, and Technology
(Document) Governance Review Check Guidelines (GBR-29) (Version 5.0) (November 21, 2021)
Health Research Authority
(Document) Insurance and Compensation in the Event of Injury in Phase I Clinical Trials (GBR-33) (June 27, 2012)
Association for the British Pharmaceutical Industry, BioIndustry Association, Clinical Contract Research Association
(Document) Involving Children in Research: MRC and ESRC Joint Guidance (GBR-4) (September 11, 2021)
Medical Research Council and Economic Social Research Council, UK
(Document) Joint Statement on Seeking Consent by Electronic Methods (GBR-6) (Version 1.2) (September 2018)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), Health Research Authority
(Document) MRC Ethics Guide 2007 – Medical Research Involving Adults Who Cannot Consent (GBR-3) (2007)
Medical Research Council, UK
(Document) MRC/DH Joint Project to Codify Good Practice in Publicly-Funded UK Clinical Trials with Medicines - Workstream 6: Pharmacovigilance (GBR-1) (July 2012)
Health Research Authority
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (GBR-5) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) Research and the Human Tissue Act 2004 - Consent (GBR-59) (Version 3) (January 2019)
Medical Research Council
(Document) Sponsorship Principles (Research and Development Forum) (GBR-2) (Version 1.0) (February 2021)
Research and Development Forum, National Health Service
(Document) Standard Operating Procedures for Research Ethics Committees (GBR-9) (Version 7.7) (Effective April 11, 2025)
UK Health Departments’ Research Ethics Service, Health Research Authority
(Document) Summary of Legal Requirements for Research with Human Tissues in Scotland (GBR-52) (V2) (June 2016)
Medical Research Council
(Document) User Reference Guide – Gaining Access to MHRA Submissions (GBR-11) (March 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(International Guidance) EudraLex - Volume 4 - Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Guidelines (GBR-15) (Date Varies by Guidance)
European Commission
(International Guidance) ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Development Safety Update Report (E2F) (GBR-61) (Step 4 Version) (August 17, 2010)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (Step 5 Version) (GBR-113) (December 1, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on Clinical Trials on Medicinal Products for Human Use, and Repealing Directive 2001/20/EC (GBR-21) (EU Clinical Trials Regulation) (April 16, 2014)
European Parliament and Council
(Webpage) Applying to a Research Ethics Committee (GBR-68) (Last Updated February 21, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Clinical Trials in the European Union (GBR-39) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
European Commission, European Medicines Agency, and Heads of Medicines Agencies
(Webpage) Clinical Trials Regulation (GBR-54) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
European Medicines Agency
(Webpage) Clinical Trials Toolkit – Routemap (GBR-18) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency, Department of Health and Social Care
(Webpage) ClinicalTrials.gov (GBR-49) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
U.S. National Library of Medicine
(Webpage) Combined Review (GBR-72) (Last Updated January 14, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Confidentiality Advisory Group (GBR-38) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Contact MHRA (GBR-58) (Last Updated April 26, 2024)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Webpage) Country Profile: United Kingdom (GBR-48) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) Decommission of eSUSAR (GBR-127) (August 3, 2022)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Webpage) Ending Your Project (GBR-128) (Last Updated June 5, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) EudraCT – European Union Drug Regulating Authorities Clinical Trials Database (GBR-87) (Last Updated June 26, 2025)
European Medicines Agency
(Webpage) Examples of Substantial and Non-Substantial Amendments (GBR-98) (Last Updated March 25, 2021)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Fast-track Research Ethics Review (GBR-116) (Last Updated May 8, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Frequently Asked Questions: Quality Standards and Design and Review Principles (GBR-14) (Last Updated October 24, 2023)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) GDPR Transparency Wording for all Sponsors (GBR-53) (Last Updated April 4, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Good Clinical Practice for Clinical Trials (GBR-92) (Last Updated March 13, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Webpage) Guidance for CAG Applicants (GBR-41) (Last Updated March 19, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Health Research Authority - Glossary (GBR-64) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Help - Using IRAS - New Users (GBR-106) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) HRA and Devolved Administrations Accreditation Scheme Report (GBR-124) (Last Updated June 5, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) HRA Approval (GBR-67) (Last Updated September 26, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) ICH Guideline Implementation (GBR-45) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) ICH Members & Observers (GBR-44) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) ICSR Submissions Login Page (GBR-126) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Webpage) Important Changes to Progress and Safety Reports (GBR-32) (Last Updated August 2, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Informing Participants and Seeking Consent (GBR-69) (Last Updated June 19, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Integrated Research Application System (IRAS) (GBR-78) (Version 6.4) (Last Updated February 4, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use Guidelines (GBR-80) (Last Updated December 19, 2024)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Webpage) International Standardized Randomized Controlled Trial Number (ISRCTN) Registry (GBR-47) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
BioMed Central
(Webpage) IRAS - Templates for Supporting Documents (GBR-107) (Last Updated June 20, 2025)
Health Research Authority, Department of Health and Social Care
(Webpage) IRAS Development Questions and Answers (GBR-122) (Last Updated May 12, 2022)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) IRAS for Combined Review Login Page (GBR-125) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Launch of the UK Local Information Pack: Supporting the Set-up of NHS/HSC Research in the UK (GBR-63) (Last Updated June 4, 2019)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Legislation (GBR-75) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Human Tissue Authority
(Webpage) Medicines: Application Forms for a Manufacturer License (GBR-28) (Last Updated May 14, 2020)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Webpage) MHRA - About Us (GBR-57) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Webpage) MHRA Account Request – MHRA Submissions (GBR-13) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Webpage) MHRA Pay (GBR-26) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Webpage) Model Agreements (GBR-70) (Last Updated July 31, 2019)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) New UK Clinical Trials Regulations Signed into Law – Implementation Period Begins (GBR-74) (Last Updated April 11, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) NHS DigiTrials (GBR-40) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
National Health Service
(Webpage) Online Booking Service (GBR-95) (Last Updated September 8, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Pay for a DSUR Submission (GBR-43) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Webpage) People-Centered Clinical Research (GBR-34) (Last Updated August 8, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) People-Centred Clinical Research (GBR-71) (Last Updated August 8, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Progress Reports (GBR-65) (Last Updated February 26, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Public Involvement (GBR-46) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Quality Assurance (GBR-123) (Last Updated April 5, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Relevant Material Under the Human Tissue Act 2004 (GBR-76) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Tissue Authority
(Webpage) Research Ethics Committees Overview (GBR-111) (Last Updated July 5, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Research Ethics Service and Research Ethics Committees (GBR-51) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Research Ethics Service (GBR-62) (Last Updated July 5, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Research FAQs (GBR-105) (Last Updated April 20, 2021)
Human Tissue Authority
(Webpage) Research Involving Children (GBR-130) (Last Updated March 15, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Research Registration and Research Project Identifiers (GBR-102) (Last Updated April 24, 2025)
Health Research Authority, Department of Health and Social Care
(Webpage) Research Transparency (GBR-55) (Last Updated June 5, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Research with Potentially Vulnerable People (GBR-131) (Last Updated May 12, 2025)
UK Research and Innovation
(Webpage) Roles and Responsibilities (GBR-103) (Last Updated May 26, 2021)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Safety Reporting (GBR-99) (Last Updated August 9, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Search RECs (GBR-112) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Services and Information: MHRA Services & Information for Patients and Healthcare Professionals (GBR-36) (Last Updated March 3, 2025)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Webpage) Staying Connected with Your Participants (GBR-117) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Parkinson’s UK
(Webpage) Templates: Recommended Wording to Help You Comply with GDPR (GBR-100) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) The Northern Ireland Protocol - Details of the agreement reached by Withdrawal Agreement Joint Committee regarding the implementation of the Northern Ireland Protocol (GBR-119) (Last Updated January 5, 2021)
United Kingdom Cabinet Office
(Webpage) UK GDPR Guidance and Resources (GBR-89) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Information Commissioner’s Office
(Webpage) UK Policy Framework for Health and Social Care Research (GBR-101) (Last Updated March 29, 2023)
Health Research Authority (England), the Department of Health and Social Care (Northern Ireland), the Scottish Government Health and Social Care Directorates, and the Department for Health and Social Services (Wales)
(Webpage) UK Transition Licensing Frequently Asked Questions (GBR-56) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Human Tissue Authority
(Webpage) UK-US Data Bridge: Data Privacy Framework Principles and List (GBR-19) (September 21, 2023)
Department for Science, Innovation and Technology
(Webpage) Use of Human Tissue in Research (GBR-73) (Last Updated February 1, 2024)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) Welcome to the Data Privacy Framework (DPF) Program (GBR-23) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
International Trade Administration
(Webpage) What Approvals and Decisions Do I Need? (GBR-66) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Research Authority
(Webpage) What is Valid Consent? (GBR-129) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Information Commissioner’s Office
(Webpage) Writing a Plain Language (Lay) Summary of Your Research Findings (GBR-120) (Last Updated January 7, 2025)
Health Research Authority
Forms
(Form) Model Material Transfer Agreement (GBR-79) (September 2021)
Health Research Authority
(Form) Notification of the End of a Clinical Trial of a Medicine for Human Use to the UK Competent Authority (GBR-133) (September 29, 2021)
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(Form) Submit your Final Report (GBR-20) (Current as of July 10, 2025)
Health Research Authority
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

United States
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
English
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
Yes
Clinical trial registration required
Yes
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
No
Age of minors
Determined at the State Level
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
This profile covers the role of the Department of Health & Human Services (HHS)’s Food & Drug Administration (FDA) in reviewing and authorizing investigational new drug applications (INDs) to conduct clinical trials using investigational drug or biological products in humans in accordance with the FDCAct, 21CFR50, and 21CFR312. Regulatory requirements for federally funded or sponsored human subjects research, known as the Common Rule (Pre2018-ComRule and RevComRule), which the HHS and its Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) implements in subpart A of 45CFR46, are also examined. Lastly, additional HHS requirements included in subparts B through E of 45CFR46 are described in this profile, where applicable, using the acronym 45CFR46-B-E. (Please note: ClinRegs does not provide information on state-level requirements pertaining to clinical trials.)

Food & Drug Administration

As per the FDCAct, 21CFR50, and 21CFR312, the FDA is the regulatory authority that regulates clinical investigations of medical products in the United States (US). According to USA-92, the FDA is responsible for protecting public health by ensuring the safety, efficacy, and security of human and veterinary drugs, biological products, and medical devices.

An overview of the FDA structure is available in USA-33. Several centers are responsible for pharmaceutical and biological product regulation, including the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) and the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER). Additionally, per USA-88, the Office of Clinical Policy (OCLP) develops clinical research policies, regulation, and guidance in collaboration with the FDA’s medical product centers.

Office for Human Research Protections and Common Rule Agencies

Per USA-93, the OHRP provides leadership in the protection of the rights, welfare, and well-being of human research subjects for studies conducted or supported by the HHS. The OHRP helps ensure this by providing clarification and guidance, developing educational programs and materials, maintaining regulatory oversight, and providing advice on ethical and regulatory issues in biomedical and social-behavioral research.

USA-65 states that the Common Rule (Pre2018-ComRule and RevComRule) outlines the basic provisions for institutional ethics committees (ECs) (referred to as institutional review boards (IRBs) in the US), informed consent, and Assurances of Compliance. See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on US departments and agencies that follow the Common Rule, which are referred to as Common Rule departments/agencies throughout the profile.

The RevComRule applies to all human subjects research that is federally funded or sponsored by a Common Rule department/agency (as identified in USA-65), and: 1) was initially approved by an EC on or after January 21, 2019; 2) had EC review waived on or after January 21, 2019; or 3) was determined to be exempt on or after January 21, 2019. (Per USA-55 and USA-74, the RevComRule is also known as the “2018 Requirements.”) For 2018 Requirements decision charts consistent with the RevComRule, including how to determine if research is exempt, see USA-74. For more information about the RevComRule, see USA-66.

Per the RevComRule, the Pre2018-ComRule requirements apply to research funded by a Common Rule department/agency (as identified in USA-65) that, prior to January 21, 2019, was either approved by an EC, had EC review waived, or was determined to be exempt from the Pre2018-ComRule. Institutions conducting research approved prior to January 21, 2019 may choose to transition to the RevComRule requirements. The institution or EC must document and date the institution's determination to transition a study on the date the determination to transition was made. The research must comply with the RevComRule beginning on that date. For pre-2018 Requirements decision charts consistent with the Pre2018-ComRule, including how to determine if research is exempt, see USA-74.

USA-65 indicates that the FDA, despite being a part of the HHS, is not a Common Rule agency. Rather, the FDA is governed by its own regulations, including the FDCAct and 21CFR50. However, the FDA is required to harmonize with the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule whenever permitted by law.

If a study is funded or sponsored by HHS, and involves an FDA-regulated product, then both sets of regulations will apply. See G-RevComRule-FDA for additional information.

Other Considerations

Per USA-16, the US is a member of the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). The US has implemented E6(R2) Good Clinical Practice: Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1) (US-ICH-GCP), among other ICH guidance. See USA-19 for the implementation status of all ICH guidelines. Additionally, see USA-22 and USA-47 for links to ICH guidance documents implemented by the FDA.

Contact Information

Food & Drug Administration

As per USA-81, USA-91, and USA-90, the contact information for the FDA is as follows:

Main FDA Telephone (general inquiries): (888) 463-6332

Food and Drug Administration
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)
10903 New Hampshire Avenue
Silver Spring, MD 20993
CBER Telephone: (800) 835-4709 or (240) 402-8010
CBER Email (manufacturers assistance): Industry.Biologics@fda.hhs.gov
CBER Email (imports): CBERimportinquiry@fda.hhs.gov
CBER Email (exports): CBERExportCert@fda.hhs.gov

Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)
Division of Drug Information
10001 New Hampshire Avenue
Hillandale Building, 4th Floor
Silver Spring, MD 20993
CDER Telephone (drug information): (301) 796-3400
CDER Email: druginfo@fda.hhs.gov

Office for Human Research Protections

Per USA-82, the contact information for the OHRP is as follows:

Office for Human Research Protections
1101 Wootton Parkway, Suite 200
Rockville, MD 20852
Telephone: (866) 447-4777 or (240) 453-6900
Email (general inquiries): OHRP@hhs.gov

Department of Health & Human Services

According to USA-83, the contact information for the HHS is as follows:

US Department of Health & Human Services
Hubert H. Humphrey Building
200 Independence Avenue, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20201
Call Center: (877) 696-6775

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the FDCAct, 21CFR50, and 21CFR312, the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) has authority over clinical investigations for drug and biological products regulated by the agency. 21CFR312 specifies that the scope of the FDA’s assessment for investigational new drug applications (INDs) includes all clinical trials (Phases 1-4). Based on 21CFR56 and 21CFR312, institutional ethics committee (EC) review of the proposed clinical investigation may be conducted in parallel with the FDA review of the IND. However, EC approval must be obtained prior to the sponsor being permitted to initiate the clinical trial. (Note: Institutional ECs are referred to as institutional review boards (IRBs) in the United States (US)).

As delineated in 21CFR312 and USA-42, sponsors are required to submit an IND to the FDA to obtain an agency exemption to ship investigational drug(s) across state lines to conduct drug or biologic clinical trial(s). An IND specifically exempts an investigational drug or biologic from FDA premarketing approval requirements that would otherwise be applicable. 21CFR312 states that “‘IND’ is synonymous with ‘Notice of Claimed Investigational Exemption for a New Drug.’"

According to USA-42, the FDA categorizes INDs as either commercial or non-commercial (research) and classifies them into the following types:

Investigator INDs - Submitted by physicians who both initiate and conduct the investigation, and who are directly responsible for administering or dispensing the investigational drug.
Emergency Use INDs - Enable the FDA to authorize experimental drugs in an emergency situation where normal IND submission timelines cannot be met. Also used for patients who do not meet the criteria of an existing study protocol, or if an approved study protocol does not exist.
Treatment INDs - Submitted for experimental drugs showing potential to address serious or immediately life-threatening conditions while the final clinical work is conducted and the FDA review takes place.
Per the G-PharmeCTD, non-commercial products refer to products not intended to be distributed commercially and include the above listed IND types.

As indicated in the G-IND-Determination, in general, human research studies must be conducted under an IND if all of the following research conditions apply:

A drug is involved as defined in the FDCAct
A clinical investigation is being conducted as defined in 21CFR312
The clinical investigation is not otherwise exempt from 21CFR312
The G-IND-Determination states that biological products may also be considered drugs within the meaning of the FDCAct.

Further, per 21CFR312 and the G-IND-Determination, whether an IND is required to conduct an investigation of a marketed drug primarily depends on the intent of the investigation and the degree of risk associated with the use of the drug in the investigation. See 21CFR312 and the G-IND-Determination for detailed exemption conditions for marketed drugs.

Clinical Trial Review Process

As delineated in 21CFR312, the FDA's primary objectives in reviewing an IND are to ensure human participant safety and rights in all phases of the investigation. Phase 1 submission reviews focus on assessing investigation safety, and Phase 2 and 3 submission reviews also include an assessment of the investigation’s scientific quality and ability to yield data capable of meeting marketing approval statutory requirements. An IND may be submitted for one (1) or more phases of an investigation.

As per USA-41 and USA-94, the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) and the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) receive IND submissions for drugs, therapeutic biological products, and other biologicals. Per the FDCAct and 21CFR312, an IND automatically goes into effect 30 calendar days from receipt, unless the FDA notifies the sponsor that the IND is subject to a clinical hold, or the FDA has notified the sponsor earlier that the trial may begin. A clinical hold is an order the FDA issues to delay or suspend a clinical investigation. If the FDA determines there may be grounds for imposing a clinical hold, an attempt will be made to discuss and resolve any issues with the sponsor prior to issuing the clinical hold order. See 21CFR312, the G-InvstgtrHold, and the G-HoldResp for more information on clinical holds.

According to USA-41, with respect to sponsor-investigators, once the FDA receives the IND, an IND number will be assigned and the application will be forwarded to the appropriate reviewing division. A letter will be sent to the sponsor-investigator providing notification of the assigned IND number, date of receipt of the original application, address where future submissions to the IND should be sent, and the name and telephone number of the FDA person to whom questions about the application should be directed.

As indicated in 21CFR312, the FDA may at any time during the course of the investigation communicate with the sponsor orally or in writing about deficiencies in the IND or about the FDA's need for more data or information. Furthermore, at the sponsor's request, the FDA will provide advice on specific matters relating to an IND.

21CFR312 indicates that once an IND is in effect, a sponsor must submit a protocol amendment if intending to conduct a study that is not covered by a protocol already contained in the IND, there is any change to the protocol that significantly affects the safety of subjects, or a new investigator is added to carry out a previously submitted protocol. A sponsor must submit a protocol amendment for a new protocol or a change in protocol before its implementation, while protocol amendments to add a new investigator or to provide additional information about investigators may be grouped and submitted at 30-day intervals. See 21CFR312 for more information on protocol amendments.

As per 21CFR312, if no subjects are entered into a clinical study two (2) years or more under an IND, or if all investigations under an IND remain on clinical hold for one (1) year or more, the IND may be placed by the FDA on inactive status. An IND that remains on inactive status for five (5) years or more may be terminated. See 21CFR312 for more information on inactive status.

21CFR312 indicates that the FDA may propose to terminate an IND based on deficiencies in the IND or in the conduct of an investigation under an IND. If the FDA proposes to terminate an IND, the agency will notify the sponsor in writing, and invite correction or explanation within a period of 30 days. If at any time the FDA concludes that continuation of the investigation presents an immediate and substantial danger to the health of individuals, the FDA will immediately, by written notice to the sponsor, terminate the IND. See 21CFR312 for more information on FDA termination.

As stated in 21CFR312, the FDA will accept, as support for an IND, a well-designed and well-conducted foreign clinical study not conducted under an IND. The study must have been conducted in accordance with good clinical practice (GCP), and the FDA must be able to validate the data from the study through an onsite inspection if the agency deems it necessary. Although the FDA will not accept as support for an IND a study that does not meet those conditions, the FDA will still examine data from such a study. See 21CFR312 and the G-FrgnCT for more details on submitting data from a foreign clinical study not conducted under an IND as support for an IND.

For more information on CDER and CBER internal policies and procedures for accepting and reviewing applications, see USA-96 and USA-95, respectively.

Per the G-FDAInspct, the FDA developed a Bioresearch Monitoring (BIMO) Program to help ensure the protection of the rights, safety, and welfare of human research subjects involved in FDA-regulated clinical trials, to verify the accuracy and reliability of clinical trial data submitted to the FDA in support of research or marketing applications, and to assess compliance with statutory requirements and FDA regulations governing the conduct of clinical trials. Among other activities, the FDA BIMO Program involves site visits to clinical investigators, sponsors, monitors, contract research organizations, ECs, nonclinical (animal) laboratories, and bioequivalence analytical laboratories. The FDA conducts both announced and unannounced inspections of clinical investigator sites. See the G-FDAInspct and USA-20 for more information on FDA inspections and the BIMO Program.

Expedited Processes

USA-84 further indicates that the FDA has several approaches to making drugs available as rapidly as possible:

Breakthrough Therapy – expedites the development and review of drugs which may demonstrate substantial improvement over available therapy
Accelerated Approval – allow drugs for serious conditions that fill an unmet medical need to be approved based on a surrogate endpoint
Priority Review – a process by which the FDA’s goal is to take action on an application within six (6) months
Fast Track – facilitates the development and expedites the review of drugs to treat serious conditions and fill an unmet medical need
See USA-84 and USA-85 for more information on each process. Additionally, see the FDCAct, as amended by the FDORA, for changes to the accelerated approval process.

Other Considerations

The G-RWDRWE-Reg, issued as part of the FDA’s Real-World Evidence (RWE) Program (see USA-17), discusses the applicability of the 21CFR312 IND regulations to various clinical study designs that utilize real-world data (RWD). See the G-RWDRWE-Reg for more information.

For information on the appropriate use of adaptive designs for clinical trials and additional information to provide the FDA to support its review, see G-AdaptiveTrials. Additionally, see the G-ExplrtryIND for FDA guidance regarding exploratory studies in humans.

For research involving cellular and gene therapy, see the guidance documents at USA-80.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Food & Drug Administration

The Food & Drug Administration (FDA) does not levy a fee to review investigational new drug submissions.

However, per the FDCAct, the FDARA, and USA-45, the FDA has the authority to collect user fees from persons that submit certain human drug applications for review or that are named in approved applications as the sponsor of certain prescription drug products. See USA-45 for more information.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Overview

As indicated in 21CFR50, 21CFR56, and 21CFR312, the United States (US) has a decentralized process for the ethics review of clinical investigations. The sponsor must obtain institutional level ethics committee (EC) approval for each study. (Note: Institutional ECs are referred to as institutional review boards (IRBs) in the US.)

As set forth in 21CFR50, 21CFR56, and 21CFR312, all clinical investigations for drug and biological products regulated by the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) require institutional EC approval.

The Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule also require that human subjects research receive institutional EC approval. However, note that these regulations’ definition of “human subject” does not include the use of non-identifiable biospecimens. Therefore, the use of non-identifiable biospecimens in research does not, on its own, mandate the application of the Pre2018-ComRule to such research. However, the RevComRule does require federal departments or agencies implementing the policy to work with data experts to reexamine the meaning of “identifiable private information” and “identifiable specimen” within one (1) year of the effective date and at least every four (4) years thereafter. In particular, these agencies will collaboratively assess whether there are analytic technologies or techniques that could be used to generate identifiable private information or identifiable specimens.

(See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule apply to research.)

Per the RevComRule, for non-exempt research (or exempt research that requires limited EC review) reviewed by an EC not operated by the institution doing the research, the institution and the EC must document the institution's reliance on the EC for research oversight and the responsibilities that each entity will undertake to ensure compliance with the RevComRule. Compliance can be achieved in a variety of ways, such as a written agreement between the institution and a specific EC, through the research protocol, or by implementing an institution-wide policy directive that allocates responsibilities between the institution and all ECs not operated by the institution. Such documentation must be part of the EC’s records. The G-HHS-Inst-Engagemt can help an institution to determine if a research study can be classified as non-exempt.

Ethics Committee Composition

As stated in 21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the RevComRule, an EC must be composed of at least five (5) members with varying backgrounds to promote complete and adequate research proposal review. The EC must be sufficiently qualified through member experience, expertise, and diversity, in terms of race, gender, cultural backgrounds, and sensitivity to issues such as community attitudes, to promote respect for its advice and counsel in safeguarding human participants’ rights and welfare. EC members must possess the professional competence to review research activities and be able to ascertain the acceptability of proposed research based on institutional commitments and regulations, applicable laws, and standards. In addition, if an EC regularly reviews research involving vulnerable populations, the committee must consider including one (1) or more individuals knowledgeable about and experienced in working with those participants. See the Vulnerable Populations section for details on vulnerable populations.

At a minimum, each EC must also include the following members:

One (1) primarily focused on scientific issues
One (1) focused on nonscientific issues
One (1) unaffiliated with the institution, and not part of the immediate family of a person affiliated with the institution
No EC member may participate in the initial or continuing review of any project in which the member has a conflicting interest, except to provide EC requested information.

Additionally, 21CFR56 indicates that efforts must be made to ensure that no EC consists entirely of men or entirely of women, including the institution’s consideration of qualified persons of both sexes, so long as no selection is made to the EC on the basis of gender. No EC may consist entirely of members of one (1) profession.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

As delineated in 21CFR56, ECs must follow written procedures for the following:

Conducting initial and continuing reviews, and reporting findings and actions
Determining which projects require review more often than annually, and which projects need verification from sources other than the investigator that no material changes have occurred since the previous EC review
Ensuring that changes in approved research are not initiated without EC review and approval except where necessary to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to participants
Ensuring prompt reporting to the EC, institution, and FDA of changes in research activity; unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others; any instance of serious or continuing noncompliance with these regulations or EC requirements or determinations; or EC approval suspension/termination
Per the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP, ECs must establish and follow written procedures for the following:

Conducting initial and continuing reviews, and reporting findings and actions to the investigator and the institution
Determining which projects require review more often than annually, and which projects need verification from sources other than the investigator that no material changes have occurred since the previous EC review
Ensuring prompt reporting to the EC of proposed changes in research and ensuring that investigators conduct the research in accordance with the terms of the EC approval until any proposed changes have received EC review and approval, except where necessary to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to participants
Ensuring prompt reporting to the EC, the institution, the FDA, and the Department of Health & Human Services (HHS)’ Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) of any unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others; any instance of serious or continuing noncompliance with these regulations or EC requirements or determinations; or EC approval suspension/termination.
21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the RevComRule further require that an institution, or where appropriate an EC, prepare and maintain adequate documentation of EC activities, including copies of all research proposals reviewed. The applicable records must be retained for at least three (3) years after completion of the research. For more details on the EC records included in this requirement, see the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and 21CFR56.

See G-IRBProcs for detailed FDA guidance on EC written procedures to enhance human participant protection and reduce regulatory burden. The guidance includes a Written Procedures Checklist that incorporates regulatory requirements as well as recommendations on operational details to support the requirements.

Per 21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the RevComRule, proposed research must be reviewed during convened meetings at which a majority of the EC members are present, including at least one (1) member whose primary concerns are nonscientific, except when an expedited review procedure is used. Research is only considered approved if it receives the majority approval of attending members.

Refer to the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, 21CFR56, the G-IRBProcs, and the G-IRBFAQs for detailed EC procedural requirements.

In addition, per the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the G-HHS-Inst-Engagemt, any institution engaged in non-exempt human subjects research conducted or supported by a Common Rule department/agency (as identified in USA-18 and USA-65) must also submit a written assurance of compliance to OHRP. According to USA-59, the Federalwide Assurance (FWA) is the only type of assurance of compliance accepted and approved by OHRP for HHS-funded research. See USA-57 for more information on FWAs.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Overview

21CFR56, 21CFR312, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP state that the primary scope of information assessed by the institutional ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an institutional review board (IRB) in the United States (US)) relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial. As delineated in 21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the RevComRule, the EC must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable. (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses, & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations). The EC is also responsible for ensuring a competent review of the research protocol, evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants, and verifying the adequacy of confidentiality safeguards.

See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule apply to research.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

In accordance with 21CFR56 and 21CFR312, the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) must review an investigational new drug application (IND) and an EC must review and approve the proposed study prior to a sponsor initiating a clinical trial. The institutional EC review of the clinical investigation may be conducted in parallel with the FDA review of the IND. However, EC approval must be obtained prior to the sponsor being permitted to initiate the clinical trial. According to 21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the RevComRule, the EC may approve, require modifications in (to secure approval), or disapprove the research.

Refer to the G-RevComRule-FDA for information on the impact of the RevComRule on studies conducted or supported by the Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) that must also comply with FDA regulations.

21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the RevComRule indicate that changes in approved research may not be initiated without EC review and approval except where necessary to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to participants.

Per 21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the G-IRBContRev, an EC has the authority to suspend or terminate approval of research that is not being conducted in accordance with the EC’s requirements or that has been associated with unexpected serious harm to participants. Any suspension or termination of approval will include a statement of the reasons for the EC’s action and will be reported promptly to the investigator, appropriate institutional officials, and the department or agency head (e.g., the FDA). See the G-IRBContRev for additional information and FDA recommendations on suspension or termination of EC approval.

See the G-IRBResp for FDA guidance for ECs on reviewing the adequacy of investigators and research sites, and determining if an IND or investigational device exemption is required. The FDA’s G-SubRecruit also provides guidance for ECs on reviewing participant recruitment methods.

Expedited Review

21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the RevComRule indicate that the FDA and HHS maintain a list of research categories that may be reviewed by an EC through an expedited review procedure (see the G-IRBExpdtdRev for the list). An EC may use the expedited review procedure to review the following:

Some or all of the research appearing on the list and found by the reviewer(s) to involve no more than minimal risk
Minor changes in previously approved research during the period (of one (1) year or less) for which approval is authorized
Under the RevComRule, research for which limited EC review is a condition of exemption
21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the RevComRule specify that under an expedited review procedure, the review may be carried out by the EC chairperson or by one (1) or more experienced reviewers designated by the chairperson from among the EC’s members. In reviewing the research, the reviewers may exercise all of the authorities of the EC except that the reviewers may not disapprove the research. A research activity may be disapproved only after review in accordance with the EC’s non-expedited review procedure.

Continuing Review and Re-approval

21CFR56 and the G-IRBContRev state that any clinical investigation must not be initiated unless the reviewed and approved study remains subject to continuing review at intervals appropriate to the degree of risk, but not less than once a year. The G-IRBContRev notes that when continuing review of the research does not occur prior to the end of the approval period specified by the EC, EC approval expires automatically. A lapse in EC approval of research occurs whenever an investigator has failed to provide continuing review information to the EC, or the EC has not conducted continuing review and re-approved the research by the expiration date of the EC approval. In such circumstances, all research activities involving human participants must stop. Enrollment of new participants cannot occur after the expiration of EC approval.

In addition, per the G-IRBContRev, research that qualified for expedited review at the time of initial review will generally continue to qualify for expedited continuing review. For additional information and FDA recommendations regarding continuing review, see the G-IRBContRev.

The Pre2018-ComRule similarly indicates that the EC must conduct reviews at intervals appropriate to the degree of risk, but not less than once per year. However, the RevComRule provides the following exceptions to the continuing review requirement, unless an EC determines otherwise:

Research eligible for expedited review
Research reviewed by the EC in accordance with the limited EC review described in Section 46.104 of the RevComRule
Research that has progressed to the point that it involves data analysis and/or accessing follow-up clinical data from procedures that are part of clinical care
Exemptions under the Revised Common Rule

Per the RevComRule, certain categories of research are exempt from EC review, and some “exempt” activities require limited EC review or broad consent. Users should refer to Section 46.104 of the RevComRule for detailed information on research categories specifically exempt from EC review, or exempt activities requiring limited EC review or broad consent.

Further, the RevComRule modifies what constitutes research to specifically exclude the following types of research:

Scholarly and journalistic activities
Public health surveillance activities authorized by a public health authority to assess onsets of disease outbreaks or conditions of public health importance
Collection and analysis of information, biospecimens, or records by or for a criminal justice agency for criminal investigative activities
Authorized operational activities in support of intelligence, homeland security, defense, or other national security missions
USA-32 notes that the regulations do not specify who at an institution may determine that research is exempt, and that institutions should implement exemption policies that most effectively address the local setting and programs of research. The HHS retains final authority as to whether a particular human subjects research study conducted or supported by HHS is exempt.

See the G-IRBFAQs, the G-OHRP-IRBApprvl, and USA-32 for frequently asked questions regarding EC procedures, approval with conditions, example research, expedited review, limited review, continuing review, and exempt research.

Other Considerations

Per the FDA’s G-IRBReview, an EC may review studies that are not performed on-site. When an institution has a local EC, the written procedures of that EC or of the institution should define the scope of studies subject to review by that EC. A non-local EC may not become the EC of record for studies within that defined scope unless the local EC or the administration of the institution agree. Any agreement to allow review by a non-local EC should be in writing. For more information, see G-IRBReview.

As stated in the G-IRBWaiver, sponsors and sponsor-investigators may request a waiver of EC requirements for drug and biological product studies regulated by the FDA. The most common circumstance for which the FDA receives a waiver request is when a sponsor wishes to conduct a foreign clinical study under an IND. In this case, typically sponsors utilize an independent ethics committee (IEC) that operates in accordance with good clinical practice (GCP). See the G-IRBWaiver for more information.

Additionally, see the G-IRBTransfer for FDA guidance on the regulatory responsibilities of ECs, clinical investigators, and sponsors when oversight of a previously approved, ongoing clinical investigation under the FDA’s jurisdiction is transferred from one (1) EC to another EC.

Cooperative Research Studies

In the event of multicenter clinical studies, also known as cooperative research studies, taking place at US institutions that are subject to the RevComRule, the institutions must rely on a single EC to review that study for the portion of the study conducted in the US. The reviewing EC will be identified by the Common Rule department/agency (as identified in USA-18 and USA-65) supporting or conducting the research or proposed by the lead institution subject to the acceptance of the department/agency. The exceptions to this requirement include: when multicenter review is required by law (including tribal law) or for research where any federal department or agency supporting or conducting the research determines that the use of a single EC is not appropriate.

Designed to complement the RevComRule, per the NIHNotice16-094 and the NIHNotice17-076, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) issued a final policy requiring all institute-funded multicenter clinical trials conducted in the US to be overseen by a single EC, unless prohibited by any federal, tribal, or state law, regulation, or policy.

For more information on multicenter research, see the FDA’s G-CentralIRB and G-CoopRes. For more information on how new sites added to ongoing cooperative research can follow the same version of the Common Rule, see the HHS’ Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP)’s G-ComRuleCnsstncy.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Many institutional ethics committees (ECs) (referred to as institutional review boards (IRBs) in the United States (US)) charge fees to review research proposals submitted by industry-sponsored research or other for-profit entities. However, this varies widely by institution. Neither the Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) nor the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) regulate institutional EC review fees. Because each EC has its own requirements, individual ECs should be contacted to confirm their specific fees.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Overview

As delineated in 21CFR56 and 45CFR46-B-E, the Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) and the HHS’ Food & Drug Administration (FDA) have mandatory registration programs for institutional ethics committee (ECs), referred to as institutional review boards (IRBs) in the United States (US). A single electronic registration system (USA-28) for both agencies is maintained by HHS’ Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP).

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

In accordance with the G-IRBReg-FAQs and USA-61, EC registration with the HHS OHRP system (USA-28) is not a form of accreditation or certification by either the FDA that the EC is in full compliance with 21CFR56, or by the HHS that the EC is in full compliance with 45CFR46-B-E. Neither EC competence nor expertise is assessed during the registration review process by either agency.

Food & Drug Administration

According to 21CFR56 and the G-IRBReg-FAQs, the FDA requires each EC in the US, that either reviews clinical investigations regulated by the agency under the FDCAct or reviews investigations intended to support research or marketing permits for agency-regulated products, to register electronically in the HHS OHRP system (USA-28). Only individuals authorized to act on the EC’s behalf are permitted to submit registration information. Non-US ECs may register voluntarily. The G-IRBReg-FAQs also indicates that while registration of non-US ECs is voluntary, the information the FDA receives from them is very helpful.

As stated in 21CFR56 and the G-IRBReg-FAQs, any EC not already registered in the HHS OHRP system (USA-28) must submit an initial registration prior to reviewing a clinical investigation in support of an investigational new drug application (IND). The HHS OHRP system (USA-28) provides instructions to assist users, depending on whether the EC is subject to regulation by only the OHRP, only the FDA, or both the OHRP and the FDA.

21CFR56 and the G-IRBReg-FAQs indicate that FDA EC registration must be renewed every three (3) years. EC registration becomes effective after review and acceptance by the HHS.

See 21CFR56 and the G-IRBReg-FAQs for detailed EC registration submission requirements. See the G-IRBInspect for FDA inspection procedures of ECs.

Office for Human Research Protections

Per the Pre2018-ComRule and RevComRule, institutions engaging in research conducted or supported by a Common Rule department/agency (as identified in USA-18 and USA-65) must obtain an approved assurance that it will comply with the Pre2018-ComRule or RevComRule requirements and certify to the department/agency heads that the research has been reviewed and approved by an EC provided for in the assurance.

Per USA-59, a Federalwide Assurance (FWA) of compliance is a document submitted by an institution (not an EC) engaged in non-exempt human subjects research conducted or supported by HHS that commits the institution to complying with Pre2018-ComRule or RevComRule requirements. FWAs also are approved by the OHRP for federalwide use, which means that other federal departments and agencies that have adopted the Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects (Pre2018-ComRule or RevComRule) may rely on the FWA for the research that they conduct or support. Institutions engaging in research conducted or supported by non-HHS federal departments or agencies should consult with the sponsoring department or agency for guidance regarding whether the FWA is appropriate for the research in question.

See USA-57 for more information on FWAs.

As stated in 45CFR46-B-E and USA-61, all ECs that review human subjects research conducted or supported by HHS and are to be designated under an OHRP FWA must register electronically with the HHS OHRP system (USA-28). EC registration becomes effective for three (3) years when reviewed and approved by OHRP. Per 45CFR46-B-E, an individual authorized to act on behalf of the institution operating the EC must submit the registration information.

Per USA-59, an institution must either register its own EC (an “internal” EC) or designate an already registered EC operated by another organization (“external” EC) after establishing a written agreement with that other organization. Additionally, each FWA must designate at least one (1) EC registered with the OHRP. The FWA is the only type of assurance of compliance accepted and approved by the OHRP.

See 45CFR46-B-E, USA-58, and USA-61 for detailed registration requirements and instructions.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Overview

As delineated in 21CFR312, USA-42, and USA-52, the United States (US) requires the sponsor to submit an investigational new drug application (IND) for the Food & Drug Administration (FDA)'s review and authorization to obtain an exemption to ship investigational drug or biological products across state lines and to administer these investigational products in humans. Per 21CFR312 and the G-IND-Determination, whether an IND is required to conduct an investigation of a drug to be marketed (this includes biological products under the FDCAct) primarily depends on the intent of the investigation, and the degree of risk associated with the use of the drug in the investigation. See the Scope of Assessment section for more information.

In addition, per 21CFR56 and 21CFR312, institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the US) review of the clinical investigation may be conducted in parallel with the FDA review of the IND. However, EC approval must be obtained prior to the sponsor being permitted to initiate the clinical trial.

Regulatory Submission

According to 21CFR312, meetings between a sponsor and the FDA may be useful in resolving questions and issues raised during the course of a clinical investigation. The FDA encourages such meetings to the extent that they aid in the evaluation of the drug and in the solution of scientific problems concerning the drug, to the degree the FDA's resources permit. See 21CFR312 for more information on meetings with the FDA.

A sponsor who is conducting a clinical trial to support a future marketing application may ask to meet with the FDA for a special protocol assessment (SPA) to help ensure the clinical trial can support the application. For more information, see G-SPA.

Additionally, the G-FDAComm describes the FDA’s philosophy regarding timely interactive communication with IND sponsors, the scope of appropriate interactions between review teams and sponsors, the types of advice appropriate for sponsors to seek from the FDA in pursuing their drug development programs, and general expectations for the timing of FDA response to sponsor inquiries. See the G-FDAComm for more information.

According to the G-PharmeCTD, which implements FDCAct requirements, and as described in USA-34 and USA-53, commercial IND submissions must be submitted in the Electronic Common Technical Document (eCTD) format. Noncommercial INDs are exempt from this eCTD format submission requirement. “Noncommercial products” refer to products not intended to be distributed commercially, including investigator-sponsored INDs and expanded access INDs (e.g., emergency use and treatment INDs). However, the G-AltrntElecSubs indicates that sponsors and applicants who receive an exemption or a waiver from filing in eCTD format should still provide those exempted or waived submissions electronically, in an alternate format.

The G-AltrntElecSubs and USA-35 indicate that for both eCTD and alternate electronic formats, submissions should include only FDA fillable forms and electronic signatures. Scanned images of FDA fillable forms should not be submitted. In addition, before making an electronic submission, a pre-assigned application number should be obtained by contacting the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) or Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER). See USA-35 for more information on requesting an application number.

For more information and detailed requirements on eCTD submissions, see the G-PharmeCTD, the G-eCTDTech, USA-35, and USA-36. Additionally, the G-CBER-ElecINDs provides instructions on how to submit an IND using an electronic folder structure on a CD-ROM.

According to the G-eCTDspecs, eCTD submissions sized 10 GB and under for most applications must be submitted via the Electronic Submissions Gateway (ESG), and the FDA also recommends the use of the ESG for submissions greater than 10 GB when possible. However, USA-44 notes that the ESG has been retired and the Electronic Submissions Gateway Next Generation (ESG NextGen) should be utilized for all electronic submissions to the FDA. See USA-37 for ESG NextGen submission user guides.

As indicated in the G-eCTDspecs, physical media greater than 10 GB should be submitted using a USB drive. For specific instructions on how to submit physical media, email CDER at esub@fda.hhs.gov or CBER at esubprep@fda.hhs.gov. See the G-eCTDspecs for additional physical media information.

The IND must be submitted in English. As indicated in 21CFR312, the sponsor must submit an accurate and complete English translation of each part of the IND that is not in English. The sponsor must also submit a copy of each original literature publication for which an English translation is submitted.

Based on information provided in 21CFR312, for paper IND submissions, the sponsor must submit an original and two (2) copies, including the original submission and all amendments and reports. According to USA-41 and USA-94, paper submissions of INDs should be sent to CDER or CBER at the following locations, as appropriate:

Drugs (submitted by Sponsor-Investigators):

Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)
Central Document Room
5901-B Ammendale Rd.
Beltsville, MD 20705-1266

Therapeutic Biological Product (submitted by Sponsor-Investigators):

Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)
Therapeutic Biological Products Document Room
5901-B Ammendale Rd.
Beltsville, MD 20705-1266

Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research-Regulated Products:

Food and Drug Administration
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)
Document Control Center
10903 New Hampshire Avenue
WO71, G112
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002

(Note: Per USA-94, CBER also accepts electronic media via mail, but electronic or email submission is preferred.)

For more information on CDER and CBER internal policies and procedures for accepting and reviewing applications, see USA-96 and USA-95, respectively.

Ethics Review Submission

Each EC maintains its own procedures and processes for review. Consequently, there is no stated regulatory requirement for clinical trial submission processes.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

As specified in 21CFR312, an investigational new drug application (IND) to the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) must include the following documents, in the order provided below:

Cover sheet (Form FDA 1571 (USA-76)) (including, but not limited to: sponsor contact information, investigational product (IP) name, application date, phase(s) of clinical investigation to be conducted, and commitment that the institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the United States (US)) will conduct initial and continuing review and approval of each study proposed in the investigation)
Table of contents
Introductory statement and general investigational plan
Investigator’s brochure (IB)
Protocols
Chemistry, manufacturing, and control data
Pharmacology and toxicology data
Previous human experience with the IP
Additional information (e.g., drug dependence and abuse potential, radioactive drugs, pediatric studies)
Relevant information (e.g., foreign language materials and number of copies - see Submission Process section for details)
For detailed application requirements, see 21CFR312. In addition, see USA-40 for other IND forms and instructions.

Furthermore, for information on the appropriate use of adaptive designs for clinical trials and additional information to provide to the FDA to support its review, see G-AdaptiveTrials.

The G-RWDRWE-Doc states that to facilitate the FDA’s internal tracking of submissions that include real-world data (RWD) and real-world evidence (RWE), sponsors and applicants are encouraged to identify in their submission cover letters certain uses of RWD/RWE. For more information, see the G-RWDRWE-Doc.

According to the G-PedStudyPlans, a sponsor who is planning to submit to the FDA a marketing application (or supplement to an application) for a new active ingredient, new indication, new dosage form, new dosing regimen, or new route of administration is required to submit an initial pediatric study plan (iPSP), if required by the Pediatric Research Equity Act (PREA). An exception to this is if the drug is for an indication granted an orphan designation. For additional details and recommendations to sponsors regarding the submission of an iPSP, see the G-PedStudyPlans.

See 21CFR312 and the G-IPCharge for additional submission requirements if a sponsor is seeking FDA authorization to charge for the use of its own IP in a clinical trial.

Ethics Committee Requirements

Each EC has its own application form and clearance requirements, which can differ significantly regarding application content requirements. However, the requirements listed below comply with 21CFR56 as well as the US-ICH-GCP and are basically consistent across all US ECs.

As per 21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP, the EC should obtain the following documents and must ensure the listed requirements are met prior to approving the study (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Clinical protocol
Informed consent forms (ICFs) and participant information (the RevComRule also requires information regarding whether informed consent was appropriately sought and documented, or waived)
Participant recruitment procedures
IB
Safety information
Participant payments and compensation
Investigator(s) current curriculum vitaes (CVs)
Additional required EC documentation
Risks to participants are minimized and are reasonable in relation to anticipated benefits
Participant selection is equitable
Adequate provisions are made to protect participant privacy and maintain confidentiality of data, where appropriate; the Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) will issue guidance to assist ECs in assessing what provisions are adequate to protect participant privacy and maintain the confidentiality of data
Per the RevComRule, where limited EC review applies, the EC does not need to make the determinations outlined above. Rather, limited EC review includes determinations that broad consent will be/was obtained properly, that adequate protections are in place for safeguarding the privacy and confidentiality of participants, and (for secondary studies) that individual research results will not be returned to participants. See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule apply to research.

See 21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and section 3 of the US-ICH-GCP for additional EC submission requirements.

Clinical Protocol

According to the US-ICH-GCP, the clinical protocol should contain the following elements:

General information
Background information
Trial objectives and purpose
Trial design
Participant selection/withdrawal
Participant treatment
Efficacy assessment
Safety assessment
Statistics
Direct access to source data/documents
Quality control/quality assurance
Ethics
Data handling/recordkeeping
Financing/insurance
Publication policy
For complete protocol requirements, see section 6 of the US-ICH-GCP.
Per the NIHNotice17-064, and provided in USA-29 and USA-27, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the FDA developed a clinical trial protocol template with instructional and example text for NIH-funded investigators to use when writing protocols for phase 2 and 3 clinical trials that require IND applications.

Additionally, the G-DecentralCT provides FDA recommendations for clinical trials with decentralized elements. According to the G-DecentralCT, the protocol should include specific instructions for limiting variability in the data collected. The protocol should specify which visits will be conducted at traditional clinical trial sites, which visits will be conducted remotely, and which visits can be left to participants’ choice. See the G-DecentralCT for additional guidance.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Overview

As delineated in 21CFR56 and 21CFR312, institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the United States (US)) review of the clinical investigation may be conducted in parallel with the Food & Drug Administration (FDA)'s review of the investigational new drug application (IND). However, EC approval must be obtained prior to the sponsor being permitted to initiate the clinical trial.

Regulatory Authority Approval

Per the FDCAct and 21CFR312, initial INDs submitted to the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) or Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) automatically go into effect in 30 calendar days, unless the FDA notifies the sponsor that the IND is subject to a clinical hold, or the FDA has notified the sponsor earlier that the trial may begin. As indicated in 21CFR312, the FDA will provide the sponsor with a written explanation of the basis for the hold as soon as possible, and no more than 30 days after the imposition of the clinical hold. See 21CFR312 for more information on clinical hold timelines. For more information on CDER and CBER internal policies and procedures for reviewing applications, see USA-96 and USA-95, respectively.

According to USA-41 and USA-42, clinical studies must not be initiated until 30 days after the FDA receives the IND, unless the FDA provides earlier notification that studies may begin.

Ethics Committee Approval

Each EC maintains its own procedures and processes for review. Consequently, there is no stated regulatory requirement for a standard timeline of review and approval of the clinical trial. However, according to the US-ICH-GCP, the institutional EC should review a proposed clinical trial within a reasonable time.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Overview

In accordance with 21CFR312, USA-41, and USA-42, a clinical trial can only commence after the investigational new drug application (IND) is reviewed by the Food & Drug Administration (FDA), which will provide a written determination within 30 days of receiving the IND. No waiting period is required following the 30-day FDA review period, unless the agency imposes a clinical hold on the IND or sends an earlier notification that studies may begin. Per 21CFR312 and 21CFR56, ethics approval from an institutional ethics committee (EC) (known as institutional review board (IRB) in the United States (US)) is also required before a clinical trial can commence.

As per 21CFR312, once an IND has been submitted and following the 30-day review period, the sponsor is permitted to import an investigational product (IP). (See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information).

Clinical Trial Agreement

Prior to the trial’s commencement, as addressed in the 21CFR312 and the G-1572FAQs, the sponsor must obtain from the investigator(s) a signed Statement of Investigator, Form FDA 1572 (USA-77). This form serves as the investigator’s agreement to provide certain information to the sponsor and to ensure compliance with the FDA’s clinical investigation regulations. Refer to the 21CFR312, the G-1572FAQs, and USA-40 for further information.

The US-ICH-GCP indicates that the sponsor must obtain the investigator’s/institution’s agreement:

To conduct the trial in compliance with good clinical practice (GCP), with the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and given approval/favorable opinion by the EC;
To comply with procedures for data recording/reporting;
To permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection; and
To retain the trial-related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution these documents are no longer needed.
The sponsor and the investigator/institution must sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement.

Clinical Trial Registration

The FDAMA, the FDAAA, and 42CFR11 require the responsible party, either the sponsor or the principal investigator (PI) designated by the sponsor, to register electronically with the ClinicalTrials.gov databank (USA-78). Per the FDAAA and 42CFR11, the sponsor/PI must register no later than 21 calendar days after the first human participant is enrolled in a trial.

42CFR11 expands the legal requirements for submitting clinical trial registration information and results for investigational products that are approved, licensed, or cleared by the FDA. See the G-3674Cert for additional FDA guidance on certifying compliance with applicable requirements, including the requirement to register applicable clinical trials.

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) issued NIHTrialInfo to complement 42CFR11 requirements. This policy requires all NIH-funded awardees and investigators conducting clinical trials, funded in whole or in part by the NIH, regardless of study phase, type of intervention, or whether they are subject to the regulation, to ensure that they register and submit trial results to ClinicalTrials.gov (USA-78).

See 42CFR11, the NIHTrialInfo, and USA-49 for detailed information on ClinicalTrials.gov (USA-78). See also the FDA’s G-DataBankPnlty for clarification on the types of civil money penalties that may be issued for failing to register a clinical trial.

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

In accordance with 21CFR312, the G-IND-Safety, the US-ICH-E2A, 42CFR11, and USA-38, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of safety reporting requirements in the United States (US) (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Adverse Event – Any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of a drug in humans, whether or not considered drug related
Suspected Adverse Reaction – Any adverse event where there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the adverse event
Adverse Reaction – Any adverse event caused by a drug. Adverse reactions are a subset of all suspected adverse reactions where there is reason to conclude that the drug caused the event
Serious Adverse Event/Serious Suspected Adverse Reaction – An adverse event/suspected adverse reaction that results in death, is life-threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, causes persistent or significant disability/incapacity, results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect, or leads to a substantial disruption of the participant’s ability to conduct normal life functions
Unexpected Adverse Event/Unexpected Suspected Adverse Reaction – An adverse event/suspected adverse reaction that is not listed in the investigator’s brochure (IB), or is not listed at the specificity or severity that has been observed; or if an IB is not required or available, is not consistent with the risk information described in the general investigational plan or elsewhere in the application
Life-threatening Adverse Event/Life-threatening Suspected Adverse Reaction – An adverse event/suspected adverse reaction is considered “life-threatening” if its occurrence places the participant at immediate risk of death. It does not include an adverse event/suspected adverse reaction that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death
According to the G-HHS-AEReqs, the Department of Health & Human Services (HHS)’s 45CFR46 regulations (the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and 45CFR46-B-E) do not define the terms “adverse event” or “unanticipated problems.” However, the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule do contain requirements relevant to reviewing and reporting these incidents. See the G-HHS-AEReqs, the G-IRBRpting, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the RevComRule for further information.

See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule apply to research.

Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

As delineated in 21CFR312 and the G-IND-Safety, the investigator must comply with the following reporting requirements:

Serious adverse events, whether or not considered drug related, must be reported immediately to the sponsor
Study endpoints that are serious adverse events must be reported in accordance with the protocol unless there is evidence suggesting a causal relationship between the drug and the event. In that case, the investigator must immediately report the event to the sponsor
Non-serious adverse events must be recorded and reported to the sponsor according to the protocol specified timetable
Report promptly to the ethics committee (EC) all unanticipated problems involving risk to human participants or others where adverse events should be considered unanticipated problems
Sponsor Responsibilities

As delineated in 21CFR312, the G-IND-Safety, and USA-38, the sponsor must report any suspected adverse reaction or adverse reaction that is both serious and unexpected. An adverse event is only required to be reported as a suspected adverse reaction if there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the adverse event. The sponsor is required to notify the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) and all participating investigators in a written safety report of potential serious risks, from clinical trials or any other source, as soon as possible, but no later than 15 calendar days after the sponsor determines the information qualifies for reporting. Additionally, the sponsor must notify the FDA of any unexpected fatal or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction as soon as possible, but no later than seven (7) calendar days following receipt of the information. The sponsor is required to submit a follow-up safety report to provide additional information obtained pertaining to a previously submitted safety report. This report should be submitted without delay, as soon as the information is available, but no later than 15 calendar days after the sponsor initially receives the information.

Per 21CFR312 and the G-IND-Safety, the sponsor must also report the following:

Any findings from epidemiological studies, pooled analyses of multiple studies, or clinical studies (other than those reported in the safety report), whether or not conducted under an investigational new drug application (IND), and whether or not conducted by the sponsor, that suggest a significant risk in humans exposed to the drug
Any findings from animal or in vitro testing, whether or not conducted by the sponsor, that suggest a significant risk in humans exposed to the drug
Any clinically important increase in the rate of a serious suspected adverse reaction over that listed in the protocol or IB
In each safety report, the sponsor must identify all safety reports previously submitted to the FDA concerning a similar suspected adverse reaction and must analyze the significance of the suspected adverse reaction in light of previous, similar reports, or any other relevant information. Refer to 21CFR312 and the G-IND-Safety for more details on these safety reporting requirements.

Per the G-IND-Safety, sponsors should have a predefined safety monitoring plan that includes processes and procedures for the review of safety information, including the frequency of review. The FDA’s G-DecentralCT further indicates that to protect the safety and welfare of trial participants in a decentralized clinical trial, sponsors should implement a safety monitoring plan that takes the decentralized nature of the clinical trial into account and ensures that adverse events and medication errors are appropriately collected and adequately addressed. As in any clinical trial, the safety monitoring plan should describe how participants are expected to respond to and report adverse events, including where to seek medical assistance locally when necessary, and where to receive follow-up care. See the G-DecentralCT for more information.

As part of the clinical trial results information submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov (USA-78), 42CFR11 requires the responsible party, either the sponsor or the principal investigator (PI) designated by the sponsor, to submit three (3) tables of adverse event information. The tables should consist of the following summarized data:

All serious adverse events
All adverse events, other than serious adverse events, that exceed a frequency of five (5) percent in any arm of the trial
All-cause mortalities
Per 42CFR11 and USA-70, this information must be submitted no later than one (1) year after the primary completion date of the clinical trial. Submission of trial results may be delayed as long as two (2) years if the sponsor or PI submits a certification to ClinicalTrials.gov (USA-78) that either: 1) the FDA has not yet approved, licensed, or cleared for marketing the investigational product (IP) being studied; or 2) the manufacturer is the sponsor and has sought or will seek approval within one (1) year.

See 42CFR11 for detailed adverse event reporting requirements.

See the G-SESftyRprtng for the FDA’s guidance to help small businesses understand and comply with safety reporting regulations for human drug and biological products that are being investigated under an IND, and for drugs that are the subjects of bioavailability and bioequivalence studies that are exempt from the IND requirements.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

As per 21CFR312, the G-IND-Safety, and USA-38, the sponsor must submit each safety report in a narrative format on Form FDA 3500A (USA-75), or in an electronic format that the FDA can process, review, and archive, and be accompanied by Form FDA 1571 (USA-76) (cover sheet).

As per the G-IND-Safety and USA-38, the submission must be identified as follows:

“IND safety report” for 15-day reports
“7-day IND safety report” for unexpected fatal or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction reports
“Follow-up IND safety report” for follow-up information
The report must be submitted to the appropriate review division (i.e., Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) or Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)). Per USA-38, the FDA recommends that sponsors submit safety reports electronically. Other means of rapid communication to the respective review division’s Regulatory Project Manager (e.g., telephone, facsimile transmission, email) may also be used. Per USA-90, fatality reports to CBER should be sent to fatalities2@fda.hhs.gov.

Additionally, 21CFR312 and the G-IND-Safety indicate that the FDA will accept foreign suspected adverse reaction reports on CIOMS Form I (See USA-13 and USA-3) instead of Form FDA 3500A (USA-75). See USA-38 and USA-48 for additional information.

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

As per the US-ICH-GCP, the investigator should promptly provide written reports to the sponsor and the institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the United States (US)) on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to participants.

As specified in 21CFR312, the investigator must furnish all reports to the sponsor who is responsible for collecting and evaluating the results obtained. In addition, per 21CFR56 and the US-ICH-GCP, the investigator should submit written summaries of the trial status to the institutional EC annually, or more frequently, if requested by the institutional EC.

21CFR312 states that the sponsor must submit a brief annual progress report on the investigation to the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) within 60 days of the anniversary date that the investigational new drug went into effect. The report must contain the following information for each study:

Title, purpose, and description of patient population, and current status
Summary of the participants screened (e.g., failed screenings; participants enrolled, withdrawn, or lost to follow-up; and other challenges)
Summary information - including information obtained during the previous year’s clinical and nonclinical investigations
Description of the general investigational plan for the coming year
Updated investigator’s brochure, if revised
Description of any significant Phase 1 protocol modifications not previously reported in a protocol amendment
Brief summary of significant foreign marketing developments with the drug
A log of any outstanding business for which the sponsor requests a reply, comment, or meeting
As indicated in 42CFR11, trial updates must be submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov (USA-78) according to the following guidelines:

Not less than once every 12 months for updated general trial registration information
Not later than 30 calendar days for any changes in overall recruitment status
Not later than 30 calendar days after the trial reaches its actual primary completion date, the date the final participant was examined or received an intervention for the purposes of final collection data for the primary outcome
Final Report

As indicated in 21CFR312, an investigator must provide the sponsor with an adequate report shortly after completion of the investigator’s participation in the investigation. There is no specific timeframe stipulated for when the report should be completed.

The US-ICH-GCP also states that upon the trial’s completion, the investigator should inform the institution and the investigator/institution should provide the EC with a summary of the trial’s outcome, and supply the FDA with any additional report(s) required of the investigator/institution.

Additionally, per 42CFR11 and USA-70, the sponsor or the principal investigator (PI) designated by the sponsor must submit results for applicable investigational product (IP) clinical trials to USA-78 no later than one (1) year following the study’s completion date. Submission of trial results may be delayed as long as two (2) years if the sponsor or PI submits a certification to USA-78 that indicates either: 1) the FDA has not yet approved, licensed, or cleared the IP being studied for marketing; or 2) the manufacturer is the sponsor and has sought or will seek approval within one (1) year. The results information must include data on the following:

Participant flow
Demographic and baseline characteristics
Outcomes and statistical analysis
Adverse events
The protocol and statistical analysis plan
Administrative information
See USA-49 for more information and 42CFR11 for more detailed requirements. See NIHTrialInfo for specific information on dissemination of NIH-funded clinical trial data. See the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH)’s E3 Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (US-ICH-E3 and the US-ICH-E3-QA) for additional guidance on report structure.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
As per 21CFR312, 21CFR50, and the US-ICH-GCP, a sponsor is defined as a person who takes responsibility for and initiates a clinical investigation. The sponsor may be an individual or pharmaceutical company, governmental agency, academic institution, private organization, or other organization. The sponsor does not actually conduct the investigation unless the sponsor is a sponsor-investigator. 21CFR312, 21CFR50, and the US-ICH-GCP define a sponsor-investigator as an individual who both initiates and conducts an investigation, and under whose immediate direction the investigational product is administered or dispensed.

In addition, 21CFR312 and the US-ICH-GCP state that a sponsor may transfer responsibility for any or all obligations to a contract research organization (CRO). Any trial-related responsibilities transferred to and assumed by a CRO should be specified in writing, and those obligations not covered by the written description will be deemed not to have been transferred. Further, a CRO that assumes any sponsor obligations must comply with the specific regulations delineated in 21CFR312 and will be subject to the same regulatory action as the sponsor for failure to comply with any obligation assumed under these regulations. However, per the US-ICH-GCP, although a sponsor may transfer all trial-related duties and functions to a CRO, the sponsor is ultimately responsible for the study data’s quality and integrity.

As indicated in 21CFR312, a sponsor may be either domestic or foreign.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Overview

As set forth in 21CFR312 and the US-ICH-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s) and the institution(s) for the clinical trial and for ensuring that the investigator(s) are qualified by training and experience. Prior to permitting an investigator(s) to conduct a study, the sponsor must obtain the following:

Signed investigator’s statement (Form FDA 1572 (USA-77))
Curriculum vitae
Clinical protocol
Financial disclosure information
As addressed in the G-1572FAQs, Form FDA 1572 (USA-77) serves as the investigator’s agreement to provide certain information to the sponsor and to assure compliance with the Food & Drug Administration (FDA)'s clinical investigation regulations. Refer to the G-1572FAQs and USA-40 for further information.

In addition, 21CFR312 and the US-ICH-GCP indicate that prior to the start of the study, the sponsor must provide the investigator(s) with the protocol and the investigator’s brochure.

See G-InvstgtrResp for more information on investigator responsibilities.

As per the G-InvstgtrAdmin, the FDA may disqualify a clinical investigator from receiving investigational drugs (including biologics) if the FDA determines that the investigator has repeatedly or deliberately violated the agency’s regulations, or submitted false information to the sponsor or FDA in any required report. See the G-InvstgtrAdmin for more details.

The G-DecentralCT provides FDA recommendations for clinical trials with decentralized elements. The G-DecentralCT notes that because decentralized clinical trials may involve many contracted services, sponsors should ensure proper coordination of decentralized elements (e.g., use of remote trial personnel for at-home visits, use of local health care providers (HCPs), direct shipping of the investigational product to participants, etc.). Such contracted services may be performed by networks of local HCPs (e.g., local clinic networks, pharmacy chains). Sponsors should ensure these networks of local HCPs are qualified to perform the contracted activities. Sponsors should also keep a record of these networks and other contracted service providers, including their roles and assigned activities. See the G-DecentralCT for additional guidance.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

No information is currently available.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

As per 21CFR50 and the G-DMCs, Data and Safety Monitoring Boards (DSMBs), (also known as Data Monitoring Committees (DMCs)), are not required by FDA regulations, except in the case of research conducted in emergency settings in which fulfilling the informed consent requirement is unfeasible. In this case, as stated in 21CFR50, the FDA requires the establishment of an independent data monitoring committee to exercise oversight of the clinical investigation. See the G-DMCs for FDA recommendations on DSMB/DMC establishment.

Additionally, the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule indicate that for all human subjects research funded and/or sponsored by a Common Rule department/agency (as identified in USA-18 and USA-65), the institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the United States (US)) must ensure that, when appropriate, the research plan makes adequate provisions for monitoring the data collected during the study to ensure participant safety. Moreover, per the NIHDataSftyMntrng and USA-72, all National Institutes of Health (NIH)-funded clinical trials require a Data and Safety Monitoring Plan and monitoring should be commensurate with risk. DSMBs are also required for multi-site clinical trials with interventions that involve potential participant risk. See the NIHDataSftyMntrng and USA-72 for detailed Department of Health & Human Services (HHS)/NIH requirements.

Although not specified as a sponsor requirement, the US-ICH-GCP states that a DSMB may be established to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial.

Multicenter Studies

The RevComRule delineates that for all human subjects research funded and/or sponsored by a Common Rule department/agency, institutions that are located in the US and engaged in multicenter research/cooperative research studies must use a single EC to review the research. See the Scope of Review section, the RevComRule, the G-CentralIRB, and G-CoopRes for additional information.

The US-ICH-GCP indicates that in the event of a multicenter clinical trial, the sponsor must ensure that:

All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor, and given EC approval
The case report forms (CRFs) are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites
Investigator responsibilities are documented prior to the start of the trial
All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, complying with a uniform set of standards to assess clinical and laboratory findings, and completing the CRFs
Communication among investigators is facilitated
See US-ICH-E17 for additional FDA guidance related to multi-regional clinical trials.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Insurance

The United States (US) regulations do not require insurance.

Compensation

The G-IRBFAQs state that institutional policy, not Food & Drug Administration (FDA) regulation, determines whether compensation and medical treatment(s) will be offered and the conditions that might be placed on participant eligibility for compensation or treatment(s).

Injury or Death

According to the US-ICH-GCP, the sponsor's policies and procedures should address the costs of treatment of trial subjects in the event of trial-related injuries in accordance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s).

As specified in 21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and US-ICH-GCP, for research involving more than minimal risk, participants must be informed as to whether any compensation or medical treatments are available in the event of trial-related injuries. See the Required Elements section for additional information.

Trial Participation

As per the FDA’s G-SbjctPayment, compensation for participation is considered a recruitment incentive and not a benefit, and is often offered when the participant’s health benefits are remote or non-existent. Payment amounts and schedules should be presented to the institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the US) at the time of the initial review. The EC should ensure the payment amount and the proposed method and timing of disbursement are not coercive or present undue influence and are also included in the informed consent document. Payment to participants who withdraw may be made at the time that they would have completed the study. While the entire payment should not be contingent upon completion of the entire study, a small payment provided as an incentive for completion is acceptable to the FDA. Further, the FDA does not consider reimbursement for travel expenses to and from the clinical trial site and associated costs such as airfare, parking, and lodging to raise issues regarding undue influence.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

Per the US-ICH-GCP, the sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process, focusing on trial activities essential to ensuring participant protection and the reliability of trial results. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that includes:

During protocol development, identify processes and data that are critical to ensure participant protection and the reliability of trial results
Identify risks to critical trial processes and data
Evaluate the identified risks against existing risk controls
Decide which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept
Document quality management activities and communicate to those involved in or affected by these activities
Periodically review risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities are effective and relevant
In the clinical study report, describe the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarize important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken
As stated in the US-ICH-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol, the US-ICH-GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor is responsible for obtaining agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, reports for monitoring and auditing purposes, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. QC should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been correctly processed. A written agreement must be signed by both the sponsor and the investigator or any other parties involved with the clinical trial, verifying that all parties agree to the trial protocol, the monitoring and auditing practices, the SOPs, and their respective duties.

Per the US-ICH-E19, the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) has adopted the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH)’s E19 guidance, A Selective Approach to Safety Data Collection in Specific Late-Stage Pre-Approval or Post-Approval Clinical Trials. The document describes circumstances in which it may be appropriate to reduce the collection of safety data in late-stage pre-approval and post-approval clinical trials, e.g., long-term outcome trials, when appropriate and with agreement from regulatory authorities. See the US-ICH-E19 for more information.

Furthermore, the Food & Drug Administration (FDA)’s G-CTEmrgncy provides general considerations to assist sponsors, institutional ethics committees (ECs) (institutional review boards (IRBs) in the United States (US)), and clinical investigators in assuring the safety of trial participants, maintaining compliance with good clinical practice (GCP), and minimizing risks to trial integrity during disasters and public health emergencies that may lead to a major disruption of clinical trial conduct and operations. See the G-CTEmrgncy for more information.

The G-DecentralCT provides FDA recommendations for clinical trials with decentralized elements. The G-DecentralCT states that to account for multiple sources of data collection in a decentralized clinical trial, the sponsor should include at least the following in a data management plan or other trial-related documents: data origin and data flow from all sources to the sponsor (e.g., a diagram that depicts the flow of data from creation to final storage); methods and technologies used for remote data acquisition from trial participants, trial personnel, and contracted service providers (e.g., local clinical laboratory facilities and local health care providers who perform trial-related activities); and a list identifying service providers for data collection, handling, and management.

The G-DecentralCT further indicates that to protect the safety and welfare of trial participants in a decentralized clinical trial, sponsors should implement a safety monitoring plan that takes the decentralized nature of the clinical trial into account and ensures that adverse events and medication errors are appropriately collected and adequately addressed. When applicable, the safety monitoring plan should describe the type of information that will be collected by a digital health technology, how that information will be used and monitored, and what action trial participants or personnel should take in response to abnormal findings or electronic alerts. See the G-DecentralCT for additional information.

See the G-eHealthRecords for the FDA’s guidance related to the use of electronic health records in clinical research, and see the G-RemoteData for recommendations on the use of digital health technologies for remote data acquisition from participants in clinical investigations that evaluate medical products. Furthermore, see the G-ESourceData for FDA guidance regarding the capture, review, and retention of electronic source data, particularly for use in filling the predefined fields in an electronic case report form.

Additionally, the G-CovariatesCT provides the FDA’s recommendations for the use of covariates in the analysis of randomized, parallel group clinical trials that are applicable to both superiority trials and noninferiority trials. See the G-CovariatesCT for more information.

The G-RWDRWE-Reg, issued as part of the FDA’s Real-World Evidence (RWE) Program (see USA-17), discusses the applicability of the 21CFR312 investigational new drug application (IND) regulations to various clinical study designs that utilize real-world data (RWD). See the G-RWDRWE-Reg for more information.

See the FDA’s G-EnrchStrat for enrichment strategies that can be used in clinical investigations intended to demonstrate the effectiveness of drug and biological products, and the G-DataCollect for recommendations on the use of a standardized approach for collecting and reporting race and ethnicity data in submissions for clinical trials.

Additionally, see USA-47 for a list of FDA clinical trials related guidance documents.

See USA-6 for information on the National Institutes of Health (NIH)’s data management and sharing policy, the NIHDataMngmnt, which applies to all research that is funded or conducted in whole or in part by the NIH, and results in the generation of scientific data.

Monitoring Requirements

As part of its QA system, the US-ICH-GCP notes that the sponsor should ensure the trial is monitored and audited. The purpose of the audit should be to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, the US-ICH-GCP, and other applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor should appoint auditors to review the clinical trial. The sponsor should ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience, and the auditor’s qualifications should be documented. The sponsor must also ensure that the audit is conducted in accordance with the sponsor’s own SOPs and the auditor observations are documented. The sponsor should develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The extent and nature of monitoring is flexible and permits varied approaches that improve effectiveness and efficiency. The sponsor may choose on-site monitoring, a combination of on-site and centralized monitoring, or where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan).

The FDA’s G-RiskMntrng states that for each clinical trial, the sponsor should develop a monitoring plan that describes the monitoring methods, responsibilities, and requirements for the trial. The monitoring plan should include a brief description of the study, its objectives, and the critical data and study procedures, with particular attention to data and procedures that are unusual in relation to clinical routine. The monitoring plan should also require training of study site staff. Additionally, the plan should communicate the specific risks to be addressed by monitoring and should provide those involved in monitoring with adequate information to effectively carry out their duties. The FDA also encourages greater use of centralized monitoring practices, where appropriate, with correspondingly less emphasis on on-site monitoring. Centralized monitoring techniques should be used to the extent appropriate and feasible to:

Supplement or reduce the frequency and extent of on-site monitoring with monitoring activities that can be done as well or better remotely, or with monitoring activities that can be accomplished using centralized processes only. Examples include monitoring data quality through routine review of submitted data, as well as completing administrative and regulatory tasks.
Target on-site monitoring by identifying higher risk clinical sites (e.g., sites with data anomalies or a higher frequency of errors, protocol violations, or dropouts relative to other sites).
For more FDA guidance on a risk-based approach to monitoring and monitoring plans, see the G-RiskMntrng and the G-RiskMntrngQA.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

As delineated in 21CFR312 and the US-ICH-GCP, if the sponsor determines the study presents an unreasonable and significant risk to the participants, the sponsor must discontinue the study as soon as possible, and no later than five (5) working days after making the determination. The sponsor must also notify the FDA, all ECs, and all investigators who have participated in the study about the termination. Additionally, the sponsor must ensure the disposition of all remaining drugs and provide the FDA with a full report on the sponsor’s actions.

According to the US-ICH-GCP, if it is discovered that noncompliance significantly affects or has the potential to significantly affect participant protection or reliability of trial results, the sponsor should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions. Further, the EC should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor.

The G-InfrmdCnsnt, which is the FDA’s discussion of the regulations in 21CFR50, further states that if a study is terminated, participants should be provided with as much information as possible regarding the reason for the termination. Such a discussion provides an opportunity to address questions that participants may have about an investigational product (IP) that was administered to them (e.g., immediate safety concerns, ability to participate in another clinical trial, and appropriate waiting period to do so) and what long-term follow up may be available or necessary.

21CFR312 indicates that if the FDA terminates an IND based on deficiencies in the IND or in the conduct of an investigation under an IND, the sponsor must end all clinical investigations conducted under the IND and recall or otherwise provide for the disposition of all unused supplies of the drug. See 21CFR312 for more information on FDA termination.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

Per the US-ICH-GCP, when using electronic trial data handling processing systems, the sponsor must ensure and document that the electronic data processing system conforms to the sponsor’s established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistency of intended performance. To validate such systems, the sponsor should use a risk assessment approach that takes into consideration the system’s intended use and potential to affect human subject protection and reliability of trial results. In addition, the sponsor must maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) that cover system setup, installation, and use. The SOPs should describe system validation and functionality testing, data collection and handling, system maintenance, system security measures, change control, data backup, recovery, contingency planning, and decommissioning. With respect to the use of these computerized systems, the responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties should be clear, and the users should receive relevant training. Refer to the US-ICH-GCP for additional information.

As per the Food & Drug Administration (FDA)’s G-DecentralCT, electronic systems can be used to perform multiple functions to manage decentralized clinical trial (DCT) operations. Training should be provided to all parties (e.g., trial personnel, local health care providers, and trial participants) who are using electronic systems to support the conduct of DCTs. Electronic systems that are used to produce and process trial records required by the FDCAct and FDA regulations are subject to 21CFR11. These systems must ensure data reliability, security, privacy, and confidentiality.

See 21CFR11 and the G-Part11 for general FDA regulations and guidance on electronic records and systems. Additionally, see the G-ElecSyst for guidance specific to clinical investigations.

Records Management

As set forth in 21CFR312 and the US-ICH-GCP, the sponsor must retain all sponsor-specific essential documents pertaining to the trial for at least two (2) years after a marketing application (known as a new drug application (NDA)) is approved for the drug; or if a NDA is not approved, until two (2) years after shipment and delivery of the drug for investigational use is discontinued and the FDA has been notified. The sponsor should also inform the investigator(s)/institution(s) in writing of the need for record retention and when the trial-related records are no longer needed. Additionally, per 21CFR312, the sponsor must upon request from the FDA, permit an officer or employee to access, copy, and verify any records and reports relating to the clinical investigation. Upon written request by the FDA, the sponsor must also submit the records or reports (or copies of them) to the agency.

In addition, the US-ICH-GCP states that the sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should allow for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval. The sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the data reported to the sponsor. The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Responsible Parties

As stated in USA-86, the HIPAA Privacy Rule establishes the conditions under which protected health information (PHI) may be used or disclosed by covered entities for research purposes (Per USA-87, the Privacy Rule is located at 45CFR160 and Subparts A and E of 45CFR164; see USA-87 for more information). The Privacy Rule builds upon protections, described in Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) (the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule) and Food & Drug Administration (FDA) (21CFR50 and 21CFR56) regulations, that help ensure the privacy of participants and the confidentiality of information. (Please note: ClinRegs does not provide information on state-level personal data protection requirements.)

Per the Privacy Rule, a covered entity means: a health plan; a healthcare clearinghouse; or a healthcare provider who transmits any health information in electronic form in connection with a transaction covered by the Privacy Rule.

Data Protection

According to the FDA’s G-CertCnfdntlty, a Certificate of Confidentiality (CoC) is intended to help protect the privacy of human subject research participants from whom identifiable, sensitive information is being collected or used in furtherance of the research. CoCs must be issued for federally funded human subject research that collects or uses identifiable, sensitive information (mandatory CoCs). For non-federally funded research, issuance of CoCs is not required but may be issued at the discretion of the FDA (discretionary CoCs). If an institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the United States (US)) determines that data collected in a clinical trial are sufficiently sensitive to warrant requesting a CoC, then the EC may request that a CoC be obtained in order to secure EC approval. Any disagreement between an EC, sponsor, and/or investigators regarding the need to request a CoC for a study should be resolved by communications among the parties. See the G-CertCnfdntlty for more information on CoCs.

28CFR202 prohibits certain data transactions that involve giving a country of concern or covered person access to: 1) bulk US sensitive personal data that involves bulk human ‘omic data; or 2) to human biospecimens from which bulk human ‘omic data could be derived. Human ‘omic data includes human genomic data, human epigenomic data, human proteomic data, and human transcriptomic data. However, 28CFR202 notes that there is an exemption for data transactions involving regulatory approval data, which refers to sensitive personal data that is de-identified or pseudonymized and that is required to be submitted to a regulatory entity, or is required by a regulatory entity to be submitted to a covered person, to obtain or maintain authorization or approval to research or market a drug, biological product, device, or combination product. Data transactions that are necessary to obtain or maintain regulatory authorization or approval to research or market a drug, biological product, device, or combination product may also be exempt. See 28CFR202 for more information on countries of concern, exempt transactions, and reporting requirements.

NIH Privacy Requirements

The NIHPrvcy indicates that the HHS’ National Institutes of Health (NIH) follows the PrvcyAct, which includes procedures for: 1) protecting records that can be retrieved by personal identifiers such as a name, social security number, or other identifying number or symbol, and 2) persons to access their identifiable records and to request correction(s) of these records. See the NIHPrvcy and the PrvcyAct for more information.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

Per USA-86, the Privacy Rule defines the means by which individuals will be informed of uses and disclosures of their medical information for research purposes, and their rights to access information about themselves held by covered entities. Researchers may obtain, create, use, and/or disclose individually identifiable health information in the course of conducting research. Under the Privacy Rule, covered entities are permitted to use and disclose PHI for research with individual authorization, or without individual authorization under limited circumstances. To use or disclose PHI without authorization by the research participant, a covered entity must obtain one (1) of the following:

Documented EC or privacy board approval
Representations from the researcher that the use or disclosure of the PHI is solely to prepare a research protocol (or for similar purposes preparatory to research), the researcher will not remove any PHI from the covered entity, and PHI for which access is sought is necessary for the research purpose
Research on protected health information of decedents
Limited data sets with a data use agreement
Research use/disclosure with individual authorization
Accounting for research disclosures
See USA-86 for more information on these circumstances.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all United States (US) clinical trials, a freely given informed consent is required to be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in 21CFR50 for Food & Drug Administration (FDA) regulated clinical trials, and the Pre2018-ComRule or the RevComRule for federally funded or sponsored clinical trials. (See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on agency-specific compliance.) Department of Health & Human Services (HHS)-funded or sponsored clinical trials must also comply with 45CFR46-B-E. The FDA has also adopted the US-ICH-GCP as guidance.

As per 21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed and approved by an institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the US) and provided to the FDA with the investigational new drug application (IND).

Per the G-RevComRule-FDA, the informed consent requirements of the RevComRule are not inconsistent with FDA regulations. Therefore, there may not be a need for sponsors or investigators to develop, and have ECs review, two (2) separate ICFs for research that must comply with both the RevComRule and FDA regulations. (See the Required Elements section for ICF content details.) Per the RevComRule, which took effect January 21, 2019, for each clinical trial conducted or supported by a federal department or agency, one (1) EC-approved ICF used to enroll subjects must be posted by the awardee or the federal department or agency component conducting the trial on a publicly available federal website that will be established as a repository for such ICFs. According to USA-12, two (2) federal websites have been identified to meet this requirement: ClinicalTrials.gov (USA-78) and a docket folder on Regulations.gov (USA-79). According to the RevComRule, if the federal department or agency supporting or conducting the clinical trial determines that certain information should not be made publicly available on a federal website (e.g., confidential, commercial information), such federal department or agency may permit or require redactions to the information posted. The ICF must be posted on the federal website after the clinical trial is closed to recruitment and no later than 60 days after the last study visit by any subject, as required by the protocol.

According to 21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP, the investigator must provide detailed research study information to the participant or the legal representative/guardian. ICF content should be briefly and clearly presented orally and in writing, in a manner that is easy to understand and commensurate with the comprehension level of the research participants, and without coercion or unduly influencing a potential participant to enroll in the clinical trial. The participant or the legal representative/guardian should also be given adequate time to consider whether to participate.

As indicated in 21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP, none of the oral and written information concerning the research study should contain any language that causes the participant or the legal representative/guardian to waive or appear to waive legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator, sponsor, institution or its agents from liability for negligence.

Additionally, per the RevComRule, participants must be provided with the information that a “reasonable person” would want to have in order to make an informed decision and an opportunity to discuss that information. Furthermore, the RevComRule requires that the informed consent, except for broad consent, must begin with a concise and focused presentation of the key information and organized to facilitate comprehension. Broad consent may be obtained in lieu of informed consent only with respect to the storage, maintenance, and secondary research uses of private identifiable information and identifiable biospecimens.

In addition, per 21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the RevComRule, the ICF may be presented as either a full length written ICF or as a short form stating the consent requirements have been presented orally. The full length written ICF may be presented orally but must then be provided to the participant or a legal representative/guardian to read before it is signed.

As per the FDA’s G-DecentralCT, obtaining informed consent remotely may be considered as part of a decentralized clinical trial. EC oversight is required to ensure the process is adequate and appropriate. See the G-DecentralCT for more information.

See the FDA’s G-ElectronicIC for recommendations on the use of electronic systems and processes that may employ multiple electronic media to obtain informed consent for both HHS-regulated human subject research and FDA-regulated clinical investigations of medical products.

See the G-InfrmdCnsnt for the FDA’s discussion of the regulations in 21CFR50. Also, see USA-60 for additional information regarding informed consent.

Additionally, see the FDA’s G-SEInfrmdCnsnt for guidance intended to help small businesses better understand the informed consent requirements set forth in 21CFR50.

Re-Consent

According to 21CFR50, the US-ICH-GCP, and the G-IRBFAQs, the EC should determine the need to re-consent enrolled participants in the event of an ICF modification due to protocol changes or new information which may, in turn, affect the willingness of already enrolled participants to continue in the study. The communication of this information should be documented.

The G-IRBFAQs indicates that the FDA does not require re-consenting of participants who have completed their active participation in the study, or of participants who are still actively participating when the change will not affect their participation. One such case is when the change will be implemented only for subsequently enrolled participants.

Language Requirements

21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP state that any information provided must be in a language understandable to the participant or the legal representative/guardian.

As delineated in the FDA’s G-InfrmdCnsnt, when non-English speaking participants are enrolled in a study, ECs and investigators must ensure that the information provided to prospective participants or their legal representative/guardian is in a language that is understandable to them. The EC must review and approve all consent documents that are to be used by investigators to document the informed consent. When translation and interpretation are needed for written and oral information to be presented to participants, the FDA recommends that the EC review and approve reasonable procedures for ensuring that the translations will be prepared by a qualified individual or entity, and that interpretation assistance is available. The FDA also recommends that whenever non-English speaking participants are enrolled in a study, appropriate interpreter services be made available throughout the course of the study.

USA-63 also states that when an oral presentation of the ICF is provided, the witness present should be fluent in both English and the participant’s language, and the translator may serve as the witness. See the G-InfrmdCnsnt and USA-63 for detailed information.

Documenting Consent

As set forth in 21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP, the participant or a legal representative/guardian must sign and date an EC-approved written ICF. A written copy of the form must be given to the participant or a legal representative/guardian. In addition, the RevComRule explicitly allows electronic signatures for consent documentation.

Per 21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the RevComRule, if the consent information is only presented orally using the short form, the participant or the legal representative/guardian must sign the form, the witness must sign both the short form and a copy of the summary once consent has been provided, and the person obtaining the consent must sign a copy of the summary. A copy of both the summary and the short form must be given to the participant or the legal representative/guardian.

The FDA’s G-InfrmdCnsnt further states that participants who cannot write can instead indicate their consent by "making their mark" on the consent document. In these situations, a note should be included in participant case histories indicating the reason for the lack of a signature and date as required in 21CFR50. The date consent was obtained should be recorded in this note. See 21CFR11 and the G-Part11 for general FDA regulations and guidance on electronic signatures. Additionally, see the G-ElecSyst for guidance specific to clinical investigations.

According to the US-ICH-GCP, where the participant is illiterate or the legal representative/guardian is illiterate, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. The witness should sign and date the ICF after the following steps have occurred:

The written ICF and any other written information to be provided to the participant is read and explained to the participant or the legal representative/guardian
The participant or the legal representative/guardian has orally consented to the participant’s involvement in the trial, and has signed and dated the ICF, if capable of doing so
Per the US-ICH-GCP, before participating in the study, the participant or the legal representative/guardian should receive a copy of the signed and dated ICF.

Waiver of Consent

Per the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule, the EC may waive the requirement to obtain a signed ICF if it finds any of the following:

The ICF would risk a breach of confidentiality by linking the participant to the study
The research presents minimal risk and involves no procedures for which written consent is required outside of the study
The RevComRule also adds that the EC may waive the requirements to obtain a signed ICF if the participants are part of a distinct cultural group or community in which signing the form is not the norm, the research presents minimal risk, and there is an alternative approach to document informed consent.

The Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule further indicate that in cases where the documentation requirement is waived, the EC may require the investigator to provide the participant or the legal representative/guardian with a written statement regarding the research.

In addition, 21CFR50, the RevComRule, and the Pre2018-ComRule state that for an EC to approve a general waiver or alteration of consent, the EC must find that:

The research involves no more than minimal risk
The research could not practicably be carried out without the requested waiver or alteration
The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the participants
Whenever appropriate, the participant or the legal representative/guardian will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation
21CFR50 and the RevComRule also state that for an EC to approve the general waiver or alteration of consent, the EC must find that if the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, the research could not practicably be carried out without using such information or biospecimens in an identifiable format.

Furthermore, the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule specify that although voluntary informed consent is always a requirement for every trial, the EC may approve a waiver or alteration of consent if the study involves a public benefit and service program conducted by or subject to the approval of state or local officials and could not be carried out without the waiver or alteration.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Based on 21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP, the informed consent form (ICF) must include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The study purpose, procedures, and expected duration of the trial
Identification of any experimental procedures
Any expected risks or discomforts to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo or fetus
Any expected benefits to the participant
Disclosure of appropriate alternative procedures that might be advantageous to the participant
Confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained and the possibility that the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) may inspect the records
Compensation and/or treatment available for the participant in the case of trial-related injury
Contact information for relevant individuals to contact in the event of a trial-related injury
That participation is voluntary, that refusal to participate will involve no penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled, and that the participant can withdraw from the trial at any time without penalty or loss of otherwise entitled benefits
Foreseeable circumstances under which the investigator may remove the participant without consent
Any expenses the participant needs to pay to participate in the trial
The consequences of a participant’s decision to withdraw from the study, and procedures for orderly withdrawal by the participant
Any significant new findings developed during the study that may affect a participant’s willingness to continue participation
Approximate number of participants in the study
As per 21CFR50, for FDA-regulated research, the following statement must be included on the informed consent documents: “A description of this clinical trial will be available on https://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.”

In the G-InfrmdCnsnt, the FDA also recommends the consent document advise participants that data collected on them up until the point of their withdrawal from a study will remain part of the study database and may not be removed. See the G-InfrmdCnsnt for additional FDA discussion of the regulations in 21CFR50.

Additionally, the G-DecentralCT provides FDA recommendations for clinical trials with decentralized elements. The G-DecentralCT indicates that, as applicable, the informed consent process in a decentralized clinical trial should inform trial participants: whether local healthcare providers will be used in the conduct of the trial; which trial activities will take place at their homes; and who will have access to their protected health information.

The RevComRule also requires the following statements to be included in the ICF:

Whether research results will be disclosed to participants
Whether or not the participant’s information or biospecimens will be used or distributed for future research
That participant’s biospecimens (even if identifiers are removed) may be used for commercial profit and if the participant will share in this profit
Whether biospecimens research may include whole genome sequencing
See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule apply to research.

Compensation Disclosure

The FDA’s G-InfrmdCnsnt further states that if no compensation in the event of injury is available, the consent process should include a statement informing the participant. See the G-InfrmdCnsnt for an example statement.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Overview

In accordance with 21CFR50, 21CFR312, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP, the United States’ (US) ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. A participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As set forth in 21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP, a potential participant or legal representative/guardian must be informed that participation is voluntary, that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time, and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled.

The Right to Information

As delineated in 21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation for participation or injury/treatment, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

As per 21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the RevComRule, participants should be given a statement describing the extent, if any, to which confidentiality of records identifying them will be maintained. Per the US-ICH-GCP, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right. It is the responsibility of the investigator(s) to safeguard the confidentiality of research data to protect the identity and records of research participants.

The RevComRule does allow the use of identifiable private information or biospecimens in instances where the institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the US) determines the research could not practicably be carried out without the information. Furthermore, it removes the requirement for the investigator to seek a waiver of informed consent to obtain information or biospecimens to screen, recruit, or determine eligibility of prospective participants. See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and see the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule apply to research.

The G-InfrmdCnsnt, which is the Food & Drug Administration (FDA)’s discussion of the regulations in 21CFR50, delineates how data should be handled when an enrolled participant decides to withdraw from a trial. Data collected on participants up to the time of withdrawal from clinical investigations of drugs conducted under an investigational new drug application (IND) must remain in the study database to maintain the scientific validity of the research. The FDA recommends that participants be advised in the consent document that the data collected on them up until the point of their withdrawal will remain part of the study database and may not be removed. If a participant withdraws from the interventional portion of the clinical investigation but agrees to continued follow-up not addressed in the original consent document, the investigator must obtain the participant’s informed consent for this limited participation using an EC-approved consent document. If a participant withdraws from the interventional portion of a clinical investigation and does not consent to continued follow-up of associated clinical outcome information, the investigator must not access the participant’s medical record or other confidential records that would require additional consent from the participant. However, such records may be accessed consistent with the original consent process, without additional consent, to obtain information collected prior to the participant’s withdrawal from the study. See the G-InfrmdCnsnt and the G-DataReten for additional information.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

21CFR50, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP state that the research participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for the sponsor and the investigator(s) to address trial-related inquiries and/or to appeal against a violation of the participant’s rights.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

The US-ICH-GCP clearly states that a research participant’s right to safety and the protection of the participant’s health and welfare must take precedence over the interests of science and society.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
21CFR50, 21CFR56, the US-ICH-GCP, and the G-ICEmrgncyReqs make provisions to protect the rights of a research participant during the informed consent process when the procedure is complicated by life-threatening medical emergencies, public health emergencies, or military operations.

Medical Emergencies

The US-ICH-GCP states that in emergency situations, when prior consent of the research participant is not possible, the consent of the legal representative/guardian, if present, should be requested. When prior consent of the participant is not possible and the legal representative/guardian is not available, enrollment of the participant should require measures described in the protocol and/or elsewhere, with documented approval/favorable opinion by the institutional ethics committee (EC) (referred to as an institutional review board (IRB) in the United States (US)). The participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed about the trial as soon as possible, and consent to continue and other consent should be requested, as appropriate.

Emergency Use Situation

21CFR56 describes emergency use as the use of a test article, such as an investigational product (IP), on a human participant in a life-threatening situation in which no standard acceptable treatment is available, and in which there is not sufficient time to obtain EC approval.

21CFR50 and the G-EmrgncyUse indicate that even in an emergency use situation, obtaining participant consent is required unless the investigator and a physician not participating in the trial certify in writing the following:

The participant is confronted by a life-threatening situation
Informed consent cannot be obtained due to an inability to communicate with the participant
Time is insufficient to obtain consent from the participant’s legal representative/guardian
No alternative methods of approved or generally recognized therapy are available
Per 21CFR50 and the G-EmrgncyUse, if immediate use of the IP is, in the investigator's opinion, required to preserve the participant’s life and time is not sufficient to obtain an independent physician’s determination prior to using the IP, the investigator’s determinations should be carried out. However, within five (5) working days following the use of the IP, the investigator’s decision must be reviewed and evaluated in writing by a physician not participating in the investigation. According to 21CFR50, 21CFR56, and the G-EmrgncyUse, the investigator must also notify the EC within five (5) working days.

21CFR56, the G-EmrgncyUse, and the G-IRBFAQs further state that following emergency use of the IP, EC review and approval is required for any subsequent use of the IP.

Emergency Research

The G-ICEmrgncyReqs defines emergency research as a planned clinical investigation that requires prior written Food & Drug Administration (FDA) authorization to proceed, and involves participant(s) who are in a life-threatening situation for which available treatments or in vitro diagnostic tests are unproven or unsatisfactory.

21CFR50 and the G-ICEmrgncyReqs delineate that for emergency research, the EC may approve the investigation without requiring the consent of all the participants if the EC (with the concurrence of a licensed physician who is an EC member or EC consultant, and not otherwise participating in the investigation) finds and documents the following:

The participants are in a life-threatening situation, available treatments are unproven or unsatisfactory, and the collection of valid scientific evidence is necessary to determine the safety and effectiveness of particular interventions
Obtaining informed consent is not feasible because: (i) the participants will not be able to give their informed consent as a result of their medical condition; (ii) the intervention under investigation must be administered before consent from the participants’ legal representative/guardian is feasible; and (iii) there is no reasonable way to identify prospectively the individuals likely to become eligible for participation in the clinical investigation
Participation in the research holds out the prospect of direct benefit to the participants
The clinical investigation could not practicably be carried out without the waiver
The proposed investigational plan defines the length of the potential therapeutic window based on scientific evidence, and the investigator has committed to attempting to contact a legal representative/guardian for each participant within that window of time and, if feasible, to asking them for consent within that window rather than proceeding without consent
The EC has reviewed and approved informed consent procedures and an informed consent document consistent with 21CFR50
Additional protections of the rights and welfare of the participants will be provided
See 21CFR50 and the G-ICEmrgncyReqs for more details.

USA-60 notes that in certain emergency circumstances, the Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) Secretarial waiver of informed consent under 46.101(i) of the RevComRule may be applicable. The HHS waiver applies to research that may be carried out in human participants who need emergency therapy and for whom, because of the participants’ medical condition and the unavailability of the participants’ legal representative/guardian, no legally effective informed consent can be obtained. Furthermore, if the research is regulated by the FDA, the HHS waiver permits the research to be conducted under a comparable provision. See the G-HHS-Emrgncy for additional guidance, USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the RevComRule applies to research.

Military Operations

21CFR50 and 10USC55 indicate that in the case of IP administration to a member of the armed forces in connection with participation in a particular military operation, the requirement for the member’s prior consent may be waived only by the US President. The US President may grant the waiver only after determining, in writing, that obtaining consent is not feasible; is contrary to the best interests of the military personnel; or is not in the interests of national security. See 21CFR50 and 10USC55 for detailed requirements.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Overview

As per 21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP, in all United States (US) clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. Institutional ethics committees (ECs) (institutional review boards (IRBs) in the US) must pay special attention to protecting such participants. (See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule apply to research.)

The US-ICH-GCP requires special considerations for vulnerable populations and characterize them as those whose willingness to volunteer in a trial may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation, or of a retaliatory response for refusing to participate. Examples of these participants include members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students; subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel; pharmaceutical industry employees; members of the armed forces; and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable subjects include patients with incurable diseases, persons in nursing homes, unemployed or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent. Per 21CFR56, vulnerable populations may include children, prisoners, pregnant women, handicapped, or mentally disabled persons, or economically or educationally disadvantaged persons.

The Pre2018-ComRule describes children, prisoners, pregnant women, handicapped persons, mentally disabled persons, or economically or educationally disadvantaged persons as vulnerable populations. The RevComRule describes children, prisoners, individuals with impaired decision-making capacity, or economically or educationally disadvantaged persons as vulnerable populations.

For more guidance documents related to vulnerable populations, see USA-64.

See the Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses, & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
As set forth in 21CFR50 and 45CFR46-B-E, children are defined as persons who have not attained the legal age for consent to treatments or procedures involved in the research, under the applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the study will be conducted. USA-25 further states that the age of majority in most states is 18 and therefore for legal purposes, children are those individuals who have not reached the age of 18. See USA-25 for a table delineating the legal age of majority by state in the United States (US).

Per the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule, children require additional safeguards to be included in any research study in order to protect their rights and welfare. (See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule apply to research.)

As delineated in the US-ICH-GCP, when the research participant is a minor, informed consent should be obtained from a parent/legal guardian. All pediatric participants should be fully informed about the trial and its risks and benefits in a language and in terms that they are easily able to understand. If capable, the participant should sign and date the written informed consent.

For all clinical trials that do not involve greater than minimal risk, 21CFR50 and 45CFR46-B-E state that a study may only be conducted if adequate provisions are made to obtain the child’s assent and the permission of their parent/legal guardian.

For all clinical trials that involve greater than minimal risk but present the prospect of direct benefit to the child, 21CFR50 and 45CFR46-B-E indicate that a study may only be conducted if the following applies:

The risk is justified by the anticipated benefit to the child
The anticipated benefit is greater than or equal to the available alternative approaches
Adequate provisions are made to obtain the child’s assent and the permission of their parent/legal guardian
For all clinical trials involving children/minors that involve greater than minimal risk and do not present the prospect of direct benefit to the child, but will likely result in increased knowledge about the child’s disorder or condition, 21CFR50 and the 45CFR46-B-E state that a study may only be conducted if the following applies:

The risk is slightly greater than minimal
The trial presents experiences that are similar to those associated with the child’s actual or expected medical, dental, psychological, social, or educational situation
Adequate provisions are made to obtain the child’s assent and the permission of their parent/legal guardian
For all clinical trials that present a reasonable opportunity to further understand, prevent, or alleviate a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of children/minors but is not otherwise approvable per 21CFR50 and 45CFR46-B-E, a study may only be conducted if the following applies:

The institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the US) finds that the investigation presents a reasonable opportunity to further the understanding, prevention, or alleviation of a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of children, and,
The Commissioner of Food and Drugs consults with an expert panel and has an opportunity for public review and comment to determine that the investigation satisfies the conditions of one (1) of the other earlier described research types, or the following conditions are met: the investigation will be conducted in accordance with sound ethical principles and adequate provisions are made for soliciting the assent of children and the permission of their parent/legal guardian
Per the RevComRule, certain exemptions may apply to observational research involving children. See the RevComRule for details.

For additional Food & Drug Administration (FDA) guidance on clinical research in children, see US-ICH-E11, the G-ChldrnSfgrd, and USA-60. Additionally, see the G-InfrmdCnsnt for FDA discussion of the regulations in 21CFR50.

Assent Requirements

Per 21CFR50 and 45CFR46-B-E, when determining whether children/minors are capable of providing assent, the EC must consider their age, maturity, and psychological state. Assent from a child/minor is not necessary for proceeding with the clinical trial if the following applies:

The capability of some or all of the children/minors is so limited that they cannot reasonably be consulted
The trial presents a potential direct benefit that is important to the health or well-being of the children/minors and is only available through the investigation
Further, the EC may waive assent, even if the children/minors are capable of providing assent, if it finds and documents the following:

Trial involves no more than minimal risk
The waiver will not negatively affect the rights and welfare of the children/minors
The trial could not be implemented without the waiver
The children/minors will be given additional information after participation, whenever appropriate
When parent/legal guardian permission is necessary, the EC must determine whether the permission of one (1) parent/legal guardian is sufficient, or if permission from both is required. If the EC determines assent is required, it must also determine whether and how assent must be documented. 21CFR50 and 45CFR46-B-E do specify, however, that the consent of both parents/legal guardians is required in the following cases:

When there is greater than minimal risk to the child with no direct benefit to the child, but the study will likely result in increased knowledge about the child’s disorder or condition
Research that presents an opportunity to understand, prevent, or alleviate a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of children/minors, but is not otherwise approvable
Exceptions to the consent requirement involving both parents/legal guardians include when one (1) parent/legal guardian is deceased, unknown, incompetent, or not reasonably available, or, when only one (1) parent/legal guardian has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child.

The G-InfrmdCnsnt indicates that when obtaining parent/legal guardian permission, in the event that the parent/legal guardian of a child does not understand English, the permission must be obtained and documented in a language that is understandable to the parent/legal guardian. The child who will be participating in the research should not be used as an interpreter for the parent/legal guardian, even if the child is fluent in English and may be able to assent. Further, parent/legal guardian permission and child assent should be viewed as an ongoing process throughout the duration of a clinical investigation. If and when a child who was enrolled in a clinical investigation with parent/legal guardian permission reaches the legal age of consent, that participant no longer meets the definition of a child under 21CFR50, and the investigator should obtain the participant’s informed consent prior to performing any further research interventions and/or procedures involving that participant. See the G-InfrmdCnsnt for additional FDA discussion of the regulations in 21CFR50.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
As per 21CFR50 and 45CFR46-B-E, for studies involving women of childbearing age or who are pregnant, a statement should be provided in the informed consent form (ICF) indicating that the treatment or procedure may involve risks to the participant, embryo, or fetus, which are currently unforeseeable. According to the US-ICH-GCP, the ICF should include a statement on the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant, and when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant.

Per the Pre2018-ComRule, pregnant women require additional safeguards to be included in any research study in order to protect their rights and welfare. Furthermore, according to the RevComRule, all of the available exemptions of the RevComRule for observational research may be applied to research involving pregnant women, fetuses, and neonates. See the RevComRule for details. (See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule apply to research.)

All Department of Health & Human Services (HHS)-sponsored or -funded research involving pregnant women, human fetuses, neonates of uncertain viability, or nonviable neonates must comply with subpart B of 45CFR46-B-E.

Pregnant Women and Fetuses

As per 45CFR46-B-E, pregnant women and fetuses may participate in research if all of the following criteria are met:

Preclinical and clinical studies have been conducted and provide data for assessing potential risks, where scientifically appropriate
Risk to the fetus is caused solely by procedures that provide potential direct benefit to the woman or fetus. If there is no potential direct benefit, then the risk to the fetus cannot be greater than minimal, and the intent of the study is to develop important biomedical knowledge that cannot be obtained otherwise
Least possible risk involved for achieving the research objectives
Consent is obtained from the woman for studies that provide potential direct benefit to the pregnant woman and/or fetus, and studies with minimal risk to the fetus conducted to develop important biomedical knowledge that cannot be obtained otherwise
Consent is obtained from the pregnant woman and the father if the study provides potential direct benefit solely to the fetus. Paternal consent is not required if the father is unavailable, incompetent, temporarily incapacitated, or the pregnancy was a result of incest or rape
All individuals providing consent are fully informed about the foreseeable impact on the fetus or neonate
No inducements will be offered to terminate a pregnancy
Participants will not be involved in determining the timing, method, or procedures for terminating a pregnancy
Participants will not be involved in determining the viability of a neonate
Neonates

45CFR46-B-E states that neonates may not be involved in research unless all of the following criteria are met:

Preclinical and clinical studies have been conducted and provide data for assessing potential risks, where scientifically appropriate
All individuals providing consent are fully informed about the foreseeable impact on the neonate
Neonates of uncertain viability may not be involved in research unless the institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the United States (US)) determines the following additional conditions are met:

Research provides the potential for increasing the probability of survival to the point of viability, and involves the least possible risk
The purpose is to develop important biomedical knowledge that cannot be obtained otherwise and there is no added risk resulting from the research
Informed consent is obtained from either parent, or if neither parent is able to provide consent, then consent is obtained from the neonate’s legal representative/guardian. Paternal consent is not required if pregnancy was a result of incest or rape.
Nonviable neonates may not be involved in research unless the following additional conditions are met:

Vital functions will not be maintained artificially
Research will not terminate the heartbeat or respiration
The purpose is to develop important biomedical knowledge that cannot be obtained otherwise, and there is no added risk resulting from the research
Consent is obtained from both parents. If neither parent is able to provide consent, then informed consent of one (1) parent will suffice. Paternal consent is not required if pregnancy was a result of incest or rape. Consent of a legal representative or guardian of either or both parents will not suffice.
Viable neonates may only be included in research to the extent permitted by and in accordance with the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule, as applicable, and subpart D of 45CFR46-B-E.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
21CFR56, 45CFR46-B-E, and the US-ICH-GCP include prisoners in their description of vulnerable populations. As set forth in 45CFR46-B-E, a prisoner is defined as any individual involuntarily confined or detained in a penal institution. Prisoners are considered vulnerable because incarceration could affect their ability to make a voluntary decision regarding participation in research.

Per the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule, prisoners require additional safeguards to be included in any research study in order to protect their rights and welfare. As delineated in the RevComRule, none of its observational research exemptions may be applied to research involving prisoners, except for research aimed at involving a broader subject population that only incidentally includes prisoners. (See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule apply to research.)

45CFR46-B-E states that prisoners may participate in nonexempt biomedical or behavioral research conducted or supported by the Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) only if the following criteria are met:

The institution conducting the research has certified to the HHS Secretary that the research has been approved by the institutional ethics committees (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the United States (US)); research involves minimal risk; and studies focus on the possible causes, effects, and processes of incarceration and criminal behavior, prisons as institutional structures, or prisoners as incarcerated persons
Research should focus on conditions specifically affecting prisoners as a class, or practices that have the intent and likelihood of improving the health or well-being of participants only after the HHS Secretary has consulted the appropriate experts, and a Federal Register notice is published indicating intent to approve such research
See USA-62 for more HHS information on prisoner research.

As per 45CFR46-B-E, ECs have additional approval responsibilities when reviewing research studies involving prisoners. An EC must only approve these studies if it determines that:

The research under review represents one (1) of the permissible categories of research delineated in Subpart C
The prisoner’s judgement will not be impaired by any possible advantages accruing to the prisoner through participation in the research, when compared to the general living conditions, medical care, quality of food, amenities, and opportunity for earnings in the prison
Research risks are commensurate with those that would be accepted by non-prisoner volunteers
Procedures for participant selection within the prison are fair to all prisoners and immune from arbitrary intervention by prison authorities or prisoners
Information is presented in a language understandable to the prisoner population
Adequate assurance exists that parole boards will not take into account a prisoner's participation in the research in making decisions regarding parole, and each prisoner is clearly informed in advance that participation in the research will have no effect on parole
As needed, adequate provisions have been made for follow-up examination or care of participants, taking into account the varying lengths of individual prisoners' sentences, and for informing participants of this fact
See Subpart C of 45CFR46-B-E for additional EC requirements related to prisoner research.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
In accordance with 21CFR56, the Pre2018-ComRule, and the US-ICH-GCP, an institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the United States (US)) must approve the participation of research participants who are mentally incapable of giving consent. According to the G-InfrmdCnsnt, which is the Food & Drug Administration (FDA)’s discussion of the regulations in 21CFR50, impaired consent capacity may involve partial impairment, impairment that fluctuates over time, or complete impairment. Consent capacity can be affected by a wide range of disorders and conditions, such as dementia, stroke, traumatic brain injury, intellectual and developmental disabilities, serious mental illness, intoxication, and delirium.

Per the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule, this population requires additional safeguards to be included in any research study to protect the rights and welfare of participants likely to be vulnerable to coercion or undue influence. (See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule apply to research.)

USA-60 further indicates that while Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) regulations do not provide specific procedures, it is expected that for research involving adult participants with mental illnesses or cognitive impairments, the EC and investigator(s) must be knowledgeable about the condition and any level of impairment that is likely to be present in the participant population.

As stated in the FDA’s G-InfrmdCnsnt, ECs and investigators should carefully consider whether the inclusion in research of individuals who lack consent capacity is ethically appropriate and scientifically necessary. Considerations that may help address these challenges and provide additional safeguards include:

Assessing consent capacity of prospective participants, for example, through use of an independent, qualified professional
Establishing a waiting period in the decision-making process to allow additional time for decision-making
Using methods to enhance consent capacity, for example through (1) simplification and/or repetition of information, (2) involvement of a participant advocate or trusted family member/friend to assist when sharing information about the clinical investigation, and (3) refraining from discussions during periods of heightened impairment, when possible
Assessing a participant’s understanding after information about the clinical investigation has been imparted, for example, through use of a questionnaire
Re-assessing consent capacity after initiation of the clinical investigation for participants with progressive disorders whose cognition may decline
Involving a legally authorized representative and/or guardian either initially or later in the clinical investigation if consent capacity diminishes
Assessing whether prospective participants who cannot provide legally effective consent on their own behalf may nonetheless be able to provide some form of oral agreement at the outset of the study and, as appropriate, throughout the course of the research (e.g., for participants with progressive disorders), and how such oral agreement would be documented
Emphasizing the voluntary nature of the decision to participate and the right to withdraw at any time
Determining whether the EC or a third party should observe the consent process
See the G-InfrmdCnsnt for additional information and FDA discussion of the regulations in 21CFR50.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
As delineated in 21CFR312, an investigational new drug is defined as a new drug or biological drug that is used in a clinical investigation. This includes a biological product that is used in vitro for diagnostic purposes. The terms ‘investigational drug’ and ‘investigational new drug’ are deemed to be synonymous for the purposes of this part.

Additionally, the US-ICH-GCP defines an investigational product as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial, including a product with a marketing authorization when used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a way different from the approved form, or when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Manufacturing

According to 21CFR312 and USA-42, the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) is responsible for authorizing the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) (also known as investigational new drugs in the United States (US)).

Per 21CFR312, sponsors that use an IP not already subject to a manufacturer’s investigational new drug application (IND) or marketing application are required to provide all of the technical chemistry, manufacturing, and control (CMC) information outlined in the application content and format requirements section of 21CFR312, unless such information may be referenced from applicable scientific literature. Sponsors using an IP already subject to a manufacturer’s application should follow the same general application format but may, if authorized by the manufacturer, refer to the manufacturer’s application to provide the technical (CMC) information supporting the proposed clinical investigation.

Moreover, as stated in 21CFR312, a sponsor may ship an IP to the investigators named in the IND under the following conditions:

Thirty (30) days after the FDA receives the IND, or
FDA provides earlier authorization to ship the IP
The sponsor is responsible for complying with the principles of good manufacturing practice (GMP) as specified in 21CFR210, the G-CGMP-Phase1, the G-CMC-Phase2-3, and the G-INDPrep. The US-ICH-GCP also states that the sponsor must ensure that the products are manufactured in accordance with GMPs.

Import

As set forth in 21CFR312, the FDA is also responsible for authorizing the import and export of IPs. An IP may be imported into the US if it is subject to an IND that is in effect for it and complies with one (1) of the following requirements:

The IP consignee is the IND sponsor, or
The consignee is a qualified investigator named in the IND, or
The consignee is the domestic agent of a foreign sponsor, is responsible for the control and distribution of the IP, and the IND identifies the consignee and describes what, if any, actions the consignee will take with respect to the IP
See USA-23 for general FDA information on importing human drugs.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Investigator's Brochure

In accordance with 21CFR312 and the US-ICH-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for providing investigators with an Investigator’s Brochure (IB). The IB must contain all of the relevant information on the investigational new drug(s)/investigational product(s) (IPs) obtained through the earlier research phases. The sponsor must also update the IB as significant new information becomes available.

As specified in 21CFR312 and the US-ICH-GCP, the IB must provide coverage of the following areas (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

A brief description of the drug substance and the formulation, including the structural formula, if known
A summary of the pharmacological and toxicological effects of the drug in animals and, to the extent known, in humans
A summary of the pharmacokinetics and biological disposition of the drug in animals and, if known, in humans
A summary of information relating to safety and effectiveness in humans obtained from prior clinical studies
A description of possible risks and side effects to be anticipated on the basis of prior experience with the drug under investigation or with related drugs, and of precautions or special monitoring to be done as part of the investigational use of the drug
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator
See 21CFR312 and the US-ICH-GCP for detailed IB content guidelines.

For investigational new drug applications (INDs) that include clinical data provided from studies conducted outside of the United States (US), 21CFR312 states that the sponsor or applicant must submit a description of the actions taken to ensure that the research conformed to good clinical practice (GCP). See Section 312.120 of 21CFR312 for detailed requirements.

Quality Management

According to USA-39, submitting a copy of the Certificate of Analysis (CoA) of the clinical batch is suggested, but not required by the Food & Drug Administration (FDA).

The US-ICH-GCP state that the sponsor must maintain a CoA to document the identity, purity, and strength of the IP(s) to be used in the clinical trial.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Investigational new drug/investigational product (IP) labeling in the United States (US) must comply with the requirements set forth in Section 312.6 of 21CFR312, which include the following:

The immediate package of an IP intended for human use must bear a label with the following statement: “Caution: New Drug-Limited by Federal (or US) law to investigational use”
The label or labeling of an IP must not bear any false or misleading statements and must not represent that the IP is safe or effective for the purposes for which it is being investigated
The appropriate Food & Drug Administration (FDA) Center Director may grant an exception or alternative to the requirements above for specific lots, batches, or other units of a human drug or biological product that is or will be included in the Strategic National Stockpile.

In addition, the US-ICH-GCP states that the IP must be coded and labeled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

As defined in the US-ICH-GCP, the sponsor must supply the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the investigational new drug(s)/investigational product(s) (IP(s)), including the comparator(s) and placebo, if applicable. The IPs must also be suitably packaged in a manner that will prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage.

Per 21CFR312, the US-ICH-GCP, the G-CGMP-Phase1, the G-CMC-Phase2-3, and the G-INDPrep, the sponsor must ensure the following (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

IP product quality and stability over the period of use
IP manufactured according to any applicable good manufacturing practices (GMPs)
Proper coding, packaging, and labeling of the IP(s)
Acceptable storage temperatures, conditions, and times for the IP
Timely delivery of the IP(s)
Refer to the US-ICH-GCP, the G-CGMP-Phase1, the G-CMC-Phase2-3, and the G-INDPrep for detailed sponsor-related IP requirements.

The FDA’s G-DecentralCT states that in some cases, decentralized clinical trials may involve the direct distribution of IPs to trial participants or local health care providers (HCPs). In these cases, investigators must remain responsible for supervising the supply of IP to trial participants or local HCPs. When applicable, trial personnel should be trained on procedures and appropriate documentation for handling, packaging, shipping, and tracking IPs. See the G-DecentralCT for detailed information.

Record Requirements

According to 21CFR312, the sponsor must maintain adequate records showing the receipt, shipment, or other disposition of the IP. These records are required to include, as appropriate, the name of the investigator to whom the drug is shipped, and the date, quantity, and batch or code mark of each such shipment. The sponsor is also required to maintain records showing financial interest paid to investigators. See 21CFR312 for more details.

As per 21CFR312 and the US-ICH-GCP, the sponsor and the investigator(s) must retain the clinical investigation records and reports for two (2) years after a marketing application (known as a New Drug Application (NDA)) is approved for the IP; or, if an NDA is not approved, until two (2) years after shipment and delivery of the IP is discontinued for investigational use and the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) has been so notified.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
A specimen, referred to as patient specimen in 49CFR173, is defined as human or animal material collected directly from humans or animals and transported for research, diagnosis, investigational activities, or disease treatment or prevention. Patient specimen includes excreta, secreta, blood and its components, tissue and tissue swabs, body parts, and specimens in transport media (e.g., transwabs, culture media, and blood culture bottles).

In addition, 42CFR73 defines specimen as samples of material from humans, animals, plants, or the environment or isolates or cultures from such samples for diagnosis, verification, or proficiency testing.

The RevComRule defines an identifiable biospecimen as one for which the identity of the participant is or may readily be ascertained by the investigator or associated with the biospecimen. (See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the RevComRule applies to research.)

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
Import/Export

The import and export of human specimens, also known as patient/diagnostic specimens/substances or human biological materials in the United States (US), is governed by several federal agencies working cooperatively to ensure the safe transport of these materials. These agencies include, but are not limited to, the Department of Transportation (DOT)’s Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)’s Import Permit Program (IPP), the Department of Health & Human Services (HHS), the United States Postal Service (USPS), and the International Air Transport Association (IATA). The IATA has also adopted all of the hazardous materials requirements set forth in the Technical Instructions for the Safe Transport of Dangerous Goods by Air (USA-10) published biannually by the United Nations (UN)’ International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).

Additionally, 28CFR202 prohibits certain data transactions that involve giving a country of concern or covered person access to: 1) bulk US sensitive personal data that involves bulk human ‘omic data; or 2) to human biospecimens from which bulk human ‘omic data could be derived. See the Personal Data Protection section and 28CFR202 for more information.

Infectious Specimens

Per 49CFR173, 42CFR73, 42CFR71, USA-21, USA-4, USA-11, and USA-31, DOT’s PHMSA, IATA, USPS, and CDC’s IPP refer to an infectious specimen/substance as a Division 6.2 material (Category A or Category B), or a select agent, etiologic agent, toxin, or infectious biological agent. The CDC’s IPP is specifically responsible for the importation of infectious specimens/substances/biological agents/vectors of human disease per 42CFR71 and for regulating the possession, use, and transfer of select agents and toxins per 42CFR73. See 42CFR71, 42CFR73, USA-31, and USA-73 for further information and permit applications for these import/transfer programs.

Additionally, the Department of Commerce (DOC)’s Bureau of Industry and Security is responsible for regulating the export of a wide range of infectious specimens that may require a DOC license. Refer to the Commerce Control List (CCL) in 15CFR774 and USA-30 to determine if a DOC export permit is required for specific specimens.

According to 49CFR173, USA-21, and USA-4, certain materials and specimens are exempt from the DOT’s PHMSA, IATA, and USPS requirements for import/export of infectious specimens. As stated in 49CFR173 and USA-4, these include materials that do not contain infectious substances; non-infectious biological materials from humans, animals, or plants; and specimens for which there is a low probability that the sample is infectious. Exempt human or animal specimens are not subject to regulation as hazardous materials, but are subject to specific packaging procedures that must be followed when shipped. Please refer to 49CFR173, USA-21, USA-4, and USA-11 for detailed DOT, IATA, and USPS shipping instructions.

NIH Specimen Requirements

The HHS’ National Institutes of Health (NIH) researchers must also comply with all applicable federal and international air and ground transport laws and regulations. Researchers must also receive prior authorization from the NIH’s Quarantine Permit Service Office to obtain permits for the import, transfer, or export of all specimens to the NIH. Detailed instructions about how to proceed are outlined in USA-71.

Per USA-2, the NIH also requires researchers to use an agreement (e.g., Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) or contract) to transfer materials among academic, nonprofit, and/or industrial organizations. See USA-2 for detailed MTA requirements and Appendix 4 for a sample MTA.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: May 20, 2025
As delineated in the G-IC-IVDs, the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) only provides informed consent guidance with respect to its regulations governing the informed consent requirement when human specimens are used for FDA-regulated in vitro diagnostic device investigations.

Informed consent requirements guiding Department of Health & Human Services (HHS)-conducted or -supported research on human research participants is regulated by the Pre2018-ComRule and 45CFR46-B-E.

Per the Pre2018-ComRule and the G-SpecimensResrch, the HHS views research involving human subject specimens as research involving human participants and subject to informed consent requirements if the specimens obtained may be classified as identifiable private information. Identifiable private information or identifiable specimens are those that can be linked to specific individuals by the investigator(s) either directly or indirectly through coding systems. The RevComRule further defines an identifiable biospecimen as one for which the identity of the participant is or may readily be ascertained by the investigator. See the Pre2018-ComRule, RevComRule, the G-SpecimensResrch, USA-2, USA-9, and USA-1 for additional information. See also the G-SpecimensResrch for exemptions to this definition.

Additionally, as defined by the HHS’ National Institutes of Health (NIH) in USA-24, research with specimens, cells, cell lines, or data involves human subjects when:

The specimens, cells, or data must be or must have been obtained from individuals who are alive, and must be or must have been obtained by an investigator conducting research; and
The investigator either must be obtaining or must have obtained specimens, cells, or data through interaction or intervention with living individuals, or must be obtaining or have obtained individually identifiable private information.
See USA-24 for detailed frequently asked questions (FAQs) on this topic.

Per the Pre2018-ComRule, the RevComRule, and USA-2, prior to collecting, storing, or using a research participant’s biological specimen(s), consent must be obtained from the participant or legal representative/guardian. See USA-18 and USA-65 for more information on Common Rule departments/agencies, and the Regulatory Authority section for additional guidance on when the Pre2018-ComRule and the RevComRule apply to research.

The RevComRule requires the informed consent form to provide one (1) of the following statements about any research that involves the collection of identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens:

A statement that identifiers might be removed from the identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens and that, after such removal, the information or biospecimens could be used for future research studies or distributed to another investigator for future research studies without additional informed consent from the subject or the legally authorized representative, if this might be a possibility
A statement that the subject's information or biospecimens collected as part of the research, even if identifiers are removed, will not be used or distributed for future research studies
A statement that the subject's biospecimens (even if identifiers are removed) may be used for commercial profit and whether the subject will or will not share in this commercial profit
Whether the research will (if known) or might include whole genome sequencing (i.e., sequencing of a human germline or somatic specimen with the intent to generate the genome or exome sequence of that specimen)
Furthermore, the RevComRule delineates the requirements of broad consent—an alternative consent process—for the storage, maintenance, and secondary research use of private information or identifiable biospecimens. Broad consent requires that the following information be provided to the participant or legal representative/guardian:

Certain basic elements from the normal consent process related to risks, benefits, confidentiality, voluntary statement, commercial profit, contact information, and whole genome sequencing elements
Types of research that may be conducted
A description of the information or biospecimens that might be used in future research, whether sharing might occur; and the types of institutions or researchers that might conduct research
A description of the length of time that the information or biospecimens may be stored, maintained, and used
A statement that participants will or will not be informed of the details of any specific research studies that might be subsequently conducted
A statement that research results either will or will not be disclosed to participants
An explanation of whom to contact for answers to questions about the participant's rights and about storage and use of the participant's identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, and whom to contact in the event of a research-related harm.
The RevComRule does allow the use of identifiable information or biospecimens in instances where the institutional ethics committee (EC) (institutional review board (IRB) in the United States (US)) determines the research could not practicably be carried out without the information in that form. Furthermore, it removes the requirement for the investigator to seek a waiver of informed consent to obtain information or biospecimens to screen, recruit, or determine eligibility of prospective participants.

The HHS’ G-StoredData-Tissues and USA-2 recommend that the following be included in informed consent documents for biospecimen collection:

A clear description of the operation of the biospecimen resource including details such as whether identifiable information will be maintained by the biospecimen resource and/or whether research results will be linked to the biospecimen
Conditions under which samples and data will be released to recipient investigators
Procedures for protecting the privacy of human research participants and confidentiality of data
Specific descriptions of the nature and purpose of the research
Information about the consequences of DNA typing if human genetic research is anticipated
(See the Required Elements and Participant Rights sections for additional information on informed consent).

Requirements
(Legislation) 21 US Code Chapter 9: Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FDCAct) (June 25, 1938)
US Congress
(Legislation) FDA Reauthorization Act of 2017 (FDARA) (August 18, 2017)
US Congress
(Legislation) Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA) (Effective October 1, 2007)
US Congress
(Legislation) Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997 (FDAMA) (November 21, 1997)
US Congress
(Legislation) Food and Drug Omnibus Reform Act of 2022 (FDORA) (December 29, 2022)
US Congress
(Legislation) Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) (August 21, 1996)
US Congress
(Legislation) Privacy Act of 1974 – 5 U.S.C. 552a: Records Maintained on Individuals (PrvcyAct) (Laws in effect as of January 3, 2024)
US Congress
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 15, Part 774 - The Commerce Control List (15CFR774) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
Bureau of Industry and Security, US Department of Commerce
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 21, Part 11 - Electronic Records; Electronic Signatures (21CFR11) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 21, Part 210 - Current Good Manufacturing Practice in Manufacturing, Processing, Packing, or Holding of Drugs; General (21CFR210) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 21, Part 312 - Investigational New Drug Application (21CFR312) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 21, Part 50 - Protection of Human Subjects (21CFR50) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 21, Part 56 - Institutional Review Boards (21CFR56) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 28, Part 202 - Access to U.S. Sensitive Personal Data and Government-Related Data by Countries of Concern or Covered Persons (28CFR202) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
US Department of Justice
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 42, Part 11 - Clinical Trials Registration and Results Information Submission (42CFR11) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 42, Part 71 - Foreign Quarantine (42CFR71) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
Public Health Service, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 42, Part 73 - Select Agents and Toxins (42CFR73) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
Public Health Service, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 45, Part 160 - General Administrative Requirements (45CFR160) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 45, Part 164 – Security and Privacy (45CFR164) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 45, Part 46, Subpart A - Basic HHS Policy for Protection of Human Research Subjects (Pre-2018 Requirements) (Pre2018-ComRule) (As Revised October 1, 2016)
US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 45, Part 46, Subpart A - Basic HHS Policy for Protection of Human Research Subjects (RevComRule) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 45, Part 46, Subparts B through E (45CFR46-B-E) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
US Department of Health & Human Services
(Regulation) Code of Federal Regulations - Title 49, Part 173 - Shippers - General Requirements for Shipments and Packagings (49CFR173) (Up to Date as of May 16, 2025)
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, US Department of Transportation
(Regulation) US Code - Title 10, Chapter 55: Medical and Dental Care (10USC55) (January 1, 2011)
US Congress
(Guidance) Approval of Research with Conditions: OHRP Guidance (G-OHRP-IRBApprvl) (November 10, 2010)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) eCTD Technical Conformance Guide (G-eCTDTech) (Version 1.8) (November 2022)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Engagement of Institutions in Human Subjects Research (G-HHS-Inst-Engagemt) (October 16, 2008)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry and Clinical Investigators: The Use of Clinical Holds Following Clinical Investigator Misconduct (G-InvstgtrHold) (September 2004)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff: FDA Acceptance of Foreign Clinical Studies Not Conducted Under an IND - Frequently Asked Questions (G-FrgnCT) (March 2012)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff: Collection of Race and Ethnicity Data in Clinical Trials (G-DataCollect) (October 2016)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry and Investigators: Safety Reporting Requirements for INDs and BA/BE Studies - Small Entity Compliance Guide (G-SESftyRprtng) (December 2012)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry, Investigators, and Reviewers: Exploratory IND Studies (G-ExplrtryIND) (January 2006)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: E3 Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports - Questions and Answers (R1) (US-ICH-E3-QA) (January 2013)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Electronic Source Data in Clinical Investigations (G-ESourceData) (September 2013)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Submitting and Reviewing Complete Responses to Clinical Holds (G-HoldResp) (Revision 1) (October 2000)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Using a Centralized IRB Review Process in Multicenter Clinical Trials (G-CentralIRB) (March 2006)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Institutional Review Boards and Clinical Investigators: Recruiting Study Subjects (G-SubRecruit) (January 1998)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for IRBs, Clinical Investigators, and Sponsors: Considerations When Transferring Clinical Investigation Oversight to Another IRB (G-IRBTransfer) (May 2014)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for IRBs, Clinical Investigators, and Sponsors: IRB Responsibilities for Reviewing the Qualifications of Investigators, Adequacy of Research Sites, and the Determination of Whether an IND/IDE is Needed (G-IRBResp) (August 2013)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Sponsors, Industry, Researchers, Investigators, and Food and Drug Administration Staff: Form FDA 3674 - Certifications to Accompany Drug, Biological Product, and Device Applications/Submissions (G-3674Cert) (Revised June 2017)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Sponsors, Investigators, and Institutional Review Boards: Questions and Answers on Informed Consent Elements, 21 CFR § 50.25(c) (Small Entity Compliance Guide) (G-SEInfrmdCnsnt) (February 2012)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Clinical Investigators, Institutional Review Boards and Sponsors: Process for Handling Referrals to FDA Under 21 CFR 50.54 - Additional Safeguards for Children in Clinical Investigations (G-ChldrnSfgrd) (December 2006)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Clinical Investigators, Sponsors, and IRBs: Adverse Event Reporting to IRBs - Improving Human Subject Protection (G-IRBRpting) (January 2009)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Clinical Investigators, Sponsors, and IRBs: Investigational New Drug Applications (INDs) - Determining Whether Human Research Studies Can Be Conducted Without an IND (G-IND-Determination) (September 2013)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Clinical Trial Sponsors: Establishment and Operation of Clinical Trial Data Monitoring Committees (G-DMCs) (March 2006)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry and Investigators: Safety Reporting Requirements for INDs (Investigational New Drug Applications) and BA/BE (Bioavailability/Bioequivalence) Studies (G-IND-Safety) (December 2012)
Food and Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry and Review Staff: Good Review Practice - Best Practices for Communication Between IND Sponsors and FDA During Drug Development (G-FDAComm) (December 2017)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry, Investigators, and Institutional Review Boards: Considerations for the Conduct of Clinical Trials of Medical Products During Major Disruptions Due to Disasters and Public Health Emergencies (G-CTEmrgncy) (September 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry, Investigators, and Other Interested Parties: Conducting Clinical Trials With Decentralized Elements (G-DecentralCT) (September 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry, Investigators, and Other Stakeholders: Digital Health Technologies for Remote Data Acquisition in Clinical Investigations (G-RemoteData) (December 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Electronic Systems, Electronic Records, and Electronic Signatures in Clinical Investigations – Questions and Answers (G-ElecSyst) (Revision 1) (October 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Enrichment Strategies for Clinical Trials to Support Determination of Effectiveness of Human Drugs and Biological Products (G-EnrchStrat) (March 2019)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Part 11, Electronic Records; Electronic Signatures – Scope and Application (G-Part11) (August 2003)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: A Risk-Based Approach to Monitoring of Clinical Investigations Questions and Answers (G-RiskMntrngQA) (April 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Adaptive Designs for Clinical Trials of Drugs and Biologics (G-AdaptiveTrials) (November 2019)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Adjusting for Covariates in Randomized Clinical Trials for Drugs and Biological Products (G-CovariatesCT) (May 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Charging for Investigational Drugs Under an IND – Questions and Answers (G-IPCharge) (Revision 1) (February 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Current Good Manufacturing Practice (CGMP) for Phase 1 Investigational Drugs (G-CGMP-Phase1) (July 2008)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: E11(R1) Addendum: Clinical Investigation of Medicinal Products in the Pediatric Population (US-ICH-E11) (April 2018)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health and Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: E17 General Principles for Planning and Design of Multiregional Clinical Trials (US-ICH-E17) (July 2018)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: E19 A Selective Approach to Safety Data Collection in Specific Late-Stage Pre-Approval or Post-Approval Clinical Trials (US-ICH-E19) (December 2022)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: E6(R2) Good Clinical Practice: Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1) (US-ICH-GCP) (Step 5) (Implemented March 1, 2018)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: INDs for Phase 2 and Phase 3 Studies - Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls Information (G-CMC-Phase2-3) (May 2003)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Investigator Responsibilities - Protecting the Rights, Safety, and Welfare of Study Subjects (G-InvstgtrResp) (October 2009)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Oversight of Clinical Investigations – A Risk-Based Approach to Monitoring (G-RiskMntrng) (August 2013)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Preparation of Investigational New Drug Products (Human and Animal) (G-INDPrep) (November 1992)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Providing Regulatory Submissions in Alternate Electronic Format (G-AltrntElecSubs) (Revision 1) (June 2022)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Providing Regulatory Submissions in Electronic Format - Certain Human Pharmaceutical Product Applications and Related Submissions Using the eCTD Specifications (G-PharmeCTD) (Revision 8) (September 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Providing Regulatory Submissions to CBER in Electronic Format - Investigational New Drug Applications (INDs) (G-CBER-ElecINDs) (March 2002)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Special Protocol Assessment (G-SPA) (Revision 1) (April 2018)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health and Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Use of Electronic Health Record Data in Clinical Investigations (G-eHealthRecords) (July 2018)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Considerations for the Use of Real-World Data and Real-World Evidence to Support Regulatory Decision-Making for Drug and Biological Products (G-RWDRWE-Reg) (August 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Pediatric Study Plans: Content of and Process for Submitting Initial Pediatric Study Plans and Amended Initial Pediatric Study Plans (G-PedStudyPlans) (July 2020)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Industry: Submitting Documents Using Real-World Data and Real-World Evidence to FDA for Drug and Biological Products (G-RWDRWE-Doc) (September 2022)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) Frequently Asked Questions - IRB Registration (G-IRBReg-FAQs) (July 2009)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Institutional Review Boards and Clinical Investigators: Cooperative Research (G-CoopRes) (January 1998)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Institutional Review Boards and Clinical Investigators: Emergency Use of an Investigational Drug or Biologic (G-EmrgncyUse) (January 1998)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Institutional Review Boards and Clinical Investigators: Institutional Review Boards Frequently Asked Questions (G-IRBFAQs) (February 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Institutional Review Boards and Clinical Investigators: Non-Local IRB Review (G-IRBReview) (January 1998)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Institutional Review Boards and Clinical Investigators: Payment and Reimbursement to Research Subjects (G-SbjctPayment) (January 2018)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Institutional Review Boards and Clinical Investigators: Protection of Human Subjects: Categories of Research That May Be Reviewed by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) Through an Expedited Review Procedure (G-IRBExpdtdRev) (November 1998)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Institutional Review Boards, Clinical Investigators, and Sponsors: Clinical Investigator Administrative Actions - Disqualification (G-InvstgtrAdmin) (December 2022)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Institutional Review Boards, Clinical Investigators, and Sponsors: Exception from Informed Consent Requirements for Emergency Research (G-ICEmrgncyReqs) (Updated April 2013)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Institutional Review Boards, Investigators, and Sponsors: Use of Electronic Informed Consent - Questions and Answers (G-ElectronicIC) (December 2016)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Institutions and IRBs: Institutional Review Board (IRB) Written Procedures (G-IRBProcs) (February 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance For IRBs, Clinical Investigators, and Sponsors: FDA Inspections of Clinical Investigators (G-FDAInspct) (June 2010)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for IRBs, Clinical Investigators, and Sponsors: FDA Institutional Review Board Inspections (G-IRBInspect) (January 2006)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for IRBs, Clinical Investigators, and Sponsors: Informed Consent (G-InfrmdCnsnt) (August 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for IRBs, Clinical Investigators, and Sponsors: IRB Continuing Review After Clinical Investigation Approval (G-IRBContRev) (February 2012)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Responsible Parties, Submitters of Certain Applications and Submissions to FDA, and FDA Staff: Civil Money Penalties Relating to the ClinicalTrials.gov Data Bank (G-DataBankPnlty) (August 2020)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Sponsors, Clinical Investigators, and IRBs: Data Retention When Subjects Withdraw from FDA-Regulated Clinical Trials (G-DataReten) (October 2008)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Sponsors, Clinical Investigators, and IRBs: Frequently Asked Questions - Statement of Investigator (Form FDA 1572) (G-1572FAQs) (May 2010)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Sponsors, Clinical Investigators, and IRBs: Waiver of IRB Requirements for Drug and Biological Product Studies (G-IRBWaiver) (Updated October 2017)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Sponsors, Institutional Review Boards, and FDA Staff: Guidance on Informed Consent for In Vitro Diagnostic Device Studies Using Leftover Human Specimens that are Not Individually Identifiable (G-IC-IVDs) (April 2006)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Sponsors, Investigators, and Institutional Review Boards: Impact of Certain Provisions of the Revised Common Rule on FDA-Regulated Clinical Investigations (G-RevComRule-FDA) (October 2018)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance for Sponsors, Sponsor-Investigators, Researchers, Industry, and Food and Drug Administration Staff: Certificates of Confidentiality (G-CertCnfdntlty) (September 2020)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guidance on Coded Private Information or Specimens Use in Research (G-SpecimensResrch) (October 16, 2008)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guideline for Industry: Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting ICH-E2A (US-ICH-E2A) (March 1995)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Guideline for Industry: E3 Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (US-ICH-E3) (July 1996)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Informed Consent Requirements in Emergency Research (OPRR Letter, 1996) (G-HHS-Emrgncy) (October 31, 1996)
US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Issues to Consider in the Research Use of Stored Data or Tissues (1996/1997) (G-StoredData-Tissues) (November 7, 1997)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) OHRP Guidance on Maintaining Consistency Regarding the Applicability of the 2018 or Pre-2018 Requirements (G-ComRuleCnsstncy) (November 12, 2020)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Reviewing and Reporting Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others and Adverse Events: OHRP Guidance (G-HHS-AEReqs) (January 15, 2007)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Guidance) Transmitting Electronic Submissions Using eCTD Specifications (G-eCTDspecs) (Version 1.9) (June 14, 2021)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Policy) Final NIH Policy for Data Management and Sharing (NIHDataMngmnt) (Effective January 25, 2023)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Policy) Final NIH Policy on the Use of a Single Institutional Review Board for Multi-Site Research (NOT-OD-16-094) (NIHNotice16-094) (Effective January 25, 2018)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Policy) NIH and FDA Release Protocol Template for Phase 2 and 3 IND/IDE Clinical Trials (NOT-OD-17-064) (NIHNotice17-064) (May 2, 2017)
National Institutes of Health and Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Policy) NIH Policy for Data and Safety Monitoring (NIHDataSftyMntrng) (June 10, 1998)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Policy) NIH Policy Manual - 3014-107 - Privacy and Confidentiality (NIHPrvcy) (Technical Revision Date: June 20, 2024)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Policy) NIH Policy on the Dissemination of NIH-Funded Clinical Trial Information (NIHTrialInfo) (Effective January 18, 2017)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Policy) Revision: Notice of Extension of Effective Date for Final NIH Policy on the Use of Single Institution Review Board for Multi-Site Research (NOT-OD-17-076) (NIHNotice17-076) (Effective January 25, 2018)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
Additional Resources
(Document) Announcement: Federal Websites that will Satisfy the Revised Common Rule’s Requirement to Post Clinical Trial Consent Forms (45 CFR 46.116(h)) (USA-12) (August 15, 2018)
US Department of Health & Human Services
(Document) Attachment D: FAQ's Terms and Recommendations on Informed Consent and Research Use of Biospecimens (USA-9) (July 20, 2011)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Document) Dangerous Goods Regulations (USA-21) (66th Edition) (Effective January 1, 2025)
International Air Transport Association, Montreal, CA and Geneva, Switzerland (Note: This document is available for purchase only.)
(Document) Ethical Conduct of Clinical Research Involving Children (USA-25) (2004)
Committee on Clinical Research Involving Children, Institute of Medicine, The National Academies
(Document) Federal Register: Hazardous Materials: Infectious Substances; Harmonization with the United Nations Recommendations (USA-11) (Effective October 1, 2006)
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, US Department of Transportation
(Document) NCI Best Practices for Biospecimen Resources (USA-2) (March 2016)
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Document) Publication 52: Hazardous, Restricted, and Perishable Mail - 346 Toxic Substances and Infectious Substances (Hazard Class 6) (USA-4) (September 7, 2023)
United States Postal Service
(Document) Reporting Adverse Drug Reactions: Definitions of Terms and Criteria for Their Use (USA-3) (1999)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(Document) Research Involving Private Information or Biospecimens (USA-1) (June 25, 2019)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Document) Technical Instructions for the Safe Transport of Dangerous Goods by Air (Doc 9284) (USA-10) (2025/2026 Edition) (Effective January 1, 2025 through December 31, 2026)
International Civil Aviation Organization, United Nations (Note: This document is available for purchase only.)
(Webpage) About Import Permit Program (USA-31) (August 15, 2024)
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) About OHRP (USA-93) (Last Reviewed March 19, 2025)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Advancing Real-World Evidence Program (USA-17) (FDA reviewed July 31, 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Assurance Process FAQs (USA-59) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Biologics Procedures (SOPPs) (USA-95) (FDA reviewed February 28, 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Bioresearch Monitoring Program Information (USA-20) (FDA reviewed August 4, 2022)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) CDER Contact Information (USA-91) (FDA reviewed October 1, 2020)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) CDER Manual of Policies & Procedures | MAPP (USA-96) (FDA reviewed March 11, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Cellular & Gene Therapy Guidances (USA-80) (FDA reviewed November 18, 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Clinical Research (USA-29) (Last Updated March 2025)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Clinical Trial Informed Consent Form Posting (sec. 116(h) of the revised Common Rule) - Docket ID: HHS-OPHS-2018-0021 (USA-79) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Clinical Trials Guidance Documents (USA-47) (FDA reviewed August 26, 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) ClinicalTrials.gov (USA-78) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Commerce Control List (CCL) (USA-30) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
Bureau of Industry and Security, US Department of Commerce
(Webpage) Common Rule Departments and Agencies (USA-18) (Last Reviewed May 15, 2025)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Contact FDA (USA-81) (FDA reviewed May 15, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Contact OHRP (USA-82) (Last Reviewed September 4, 2024)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Contacts in the Center for Biologics Evaluation & Research (CBER) (USA-90) (FDA reviewed September 13, 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Development & Approval Process - Drugs (USA-85) (FDA reviewed August 8, 2022)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Division of Occupational Health and Safety - Biological Materials Shipping - QPSO (USA-71) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Electronic Common Technical Document (eCTD) (USA-34) (FDA reviewed October 4, 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Electronic Regulatory Submission and Review (USA-36) (FDA reviewed January 18, 2022)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Electronic Submission System - Welcome to the Electronic Submission System for FWAs and IRB Registrations (USA-28) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Electronic Submissions Gateway (USA-44) (FDA reviewed May 19, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Exempt Research Determination FAQs (USA-32) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
Office of Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Fast Track, Breakthrough Therapy, Accelerated Approval, Priority Review (USA-84) (FDA reviewed June 12, 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) FDA Overview Organization Chart (USA-33) (FDA reviewed March 17, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) FDA's Role: ClinicalTrials.gov Information (USA-49) (FDA reviewed December 4, 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects ('Common Rule') (USA-65) (Last Reviewed March 27, 2024)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Federalwide Assurance (FWA) for the Protection of Human Subjects (USA-57) (Last Reviewed July 31, 2017)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Frequently Asked Questions: Human Subjects - Data and Safety Monitoring (USA-72) (Last Updated August 2, 2024)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Frequently Asked Questions: Human Subjects - Human Specimens and Cell Lines (USA-24) (Last Updated August 2, 2024)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Getting Started with ESG NextGen - User Guides (USA-37) (FDA reviewed May 2, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) HHS – Contact Us (USA-83) (Last Reviewed March 6, 2025)
US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) HHS and 16 Other Federal Departments and Agencies Issue a Final Rule to Delay for an Additional 6 Months the General Compliance Date of Revisions to the Common Rule While Allowing the Use of Three Burden-Reducing Provisions During the Delay Period (USA-55) (June 18, 2018)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Human Subject Regulations Decision Charts (USA-74) (Last Reviewed June 30, 2020)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) ICH Guidance Documents (USA-22) (FDA reviewed December 11, 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) ICH Guideline Implementation (USA-19) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) Import Permit Program - Application Questions (USA-73) (October 29, 2024)
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Importing Human Drugs (USA-23) (FDA reviewed October 9, 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) IND Application Reporting: Safety Reports (USA-38) (FDA reviewed October 19, 2021)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) IND Applications for Clinical Investigations: Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Control (CMC) Information (USA-39) (FDA reviewed February 25, 2022)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) IND Forms and Instructions (USA-40) (FDA reviewed March 31, 2022)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Information for Sponsor-Investigators Submitting Investigational New Drug Applications (INDs) (USA-41) (FDA reviewed June 27, 2017)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Informed Consent FAQs (USA-60) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Informed Consent of Subjects Who Do Not Speak English (USA-63) (November 9, 1995)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Initial IRB Registration (USA-58) (Last Reviewed March 15, 2016)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Investigational New Drug (IND) Application (USA-42) (FDA reviewed September 16, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Investigational New Drug Applications (IND) for CBER-Regulated Products (USA-52) (FDA reviewed March 27, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) IRB Registration Process FAQs (USA-61) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) MedWatch Forms for FDA Safety Reporting (USA-48) (FDA reviewed February 8, 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Members and Observers (USA-16) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical e-Protocol Writing Tool (USA-27) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Office of Clinical Policy (USA-88) (FDA reviewed December 11, 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Prescription Drug User Fee Amendments (USA-45) (FDA reviewed May 5, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Prisoner Research FAQs (USA-62) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Regulatory Submissions in Electronic and Paper Format for CBER-Regulated Products (USA-94) (FDA reviewed May 23, 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Research (USA-86) (Last Reviewed August 21, 2024)
US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Research Covered Under the Data Management & Sharing Policy (USA-6) (Current as May 20, 2025)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Revision of the Common Rule (USA-66) (Last Reviewed March 8, 2021)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Submission of an Investigational New Drug Application (IND) to CBER (USA-53) (FDA reviewed September 29, 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Submit Using eCTD (USA-35) (FDA reviewed September 18, 2024)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Summary of HHS/NIH Initiatives to Enhance Availability of Clinical Trial Information (USA-70) (September 15, 2016)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) The HIPAA Privacy Rule (USA-87) (Last Reviewed September 27, 2024)
US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Vulnerable Populations (USA-64) (Current as of May 20, 2025)
Office for Human Research Protections, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) What We Do (USA-92) (FDA reviewed November 21, 2023)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
Forms
(Form) CIOMS Form I (USA-13) (Date Unavailable)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(Form) Form FDA 1571 (3/25): Investigational New Drug Application (IND) (USA-76) (Expires September 30, 2026)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Form) Form FDA 1572 (4/25): Statement of Investigator (USA-77) (Expires September 30, 2026)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Form) Form FDA 3500A (11/22): MedWatch (USA-75) (Expires June 30, 2025)
Food & Drug Administration, US Department of Health & Human Services
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Vietnam
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
Vietnamese or English
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
No
Clinical trial registration required
No
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
No
Age of minors
Under 16
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Ministry of Health

As per the ClinDrugTrialGCP, PharmLaw-VNM, DecreeMOH, and ASTTReg, Vietnam’s Ministry of Health (MOH) is the regulatory authority responsible for clinical trial approvals, registration, oversight, and inspections. The MOH grants permission for clinical trials to be conducted in Vietnam.

As indicated in DecreeMOH, the MOH is a governmental agency whose mission is to oversee public health care management and protection for the Vietnamese population. With regard to pharmaceuticals, the MOH’s activities include, but are not limited to, formulating and promulgating legal documents, regulations, and national standards; granting and withdrawing pharmaceutical practice certificates; and issuing certificates of eligibility, registration permits, medicine import/export permits, and certificates of good manufacturing practice (GMP).

The ClinDrugTrialGCP and ASTTReg specify that the MOH’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT) is responsible for managing the clinical trial review process. As per the ClinTrialSup, the MOH’s ASTT is also responsible for registering contract research organizations (CROs) that support clinical studies and provide other research services. (See the ClinTrialSup for detailed information on clinical trial research support activities and the related registration forms.)

Pursuant to the DrugRgstrtn, an Advisory Council created by the MOH issues registration certificates for drug and pharmaceutical ingredient circulation. The Advisory Council consists of experts with appropriate professional qualifications and experience to ensure the ability to evaluate dossiers, respond to experts' opinions and recommendations of the MOH’s Drug Administration of Vietnam (DAV), and advise the Minister of Health on issues related to pharmaceutical legislation, quality, safety, and efficacy records of drugs and pharmaceutical ingredients. See the Scope of Assessment section for more information on the Advisory Council’s role in drug clinical trial phase exemptions.

Please note: Vietnam is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (VNM-2), which may have implications for studies of investigational products developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see VNM-6.

Contact Information

According to VNM-11, the contact information for the ASTT is as follows:

Ministry of Health
Administration of Science, Technology and Training
No. 138B Giang Vo
Ba Dinh District
Hanoi City, Vietnam

Phone: 04.33846688
Fax: 04.32373236
Email: cuck2dt@moh.gov.vn

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the ClinDrugTrialGCP, PharmLaw-VNM, and ASTTReg, Vietnam’s Ministry of Health (MOH)’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT) manages the clinical trial review process for registered and unregistered investigational products (IPs). The ASTT is responsible for reviewing all clinical study documents, and per the ClinDrugTrialGCP, PharmLaw-VNM, the ECReg, and the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), the MOH’s national level ethics committee (EC), the National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (NECBR), is responsible for approving the research protocol. The ECReg further indicates that institutional level ECs, known as Councils of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level (CEBRGLs) in Vietnam, are responsible for reviewing clinical trial documents before submitting them to the NECBR. For institutions conducting research involving humans that do not have a CEBRGL, the review and evaluation of the research is performed by a CEBRGL appropriate to the research field.

According to the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the ASTT reviews a clinical trial registration dossier submitted by the sponsor, as well as a study approval dossier submitted by the institution. Evidence of institutional EC approval from a CEBRGL is a required element of the study approval dossier, so CEBRGL and ASTT approval cannot be conducted in parallel. Additionally, the NECBR’s review of the protocol is initiated by the MOH as part of the ASTT’s study approval dossier review procedures. Per the ClinDrugTrialGCP and PharmLaw-VNM, ASTT review is finalized once NECBR approval is obtained and the entire study approval dossier is sent to the Minister of Health for final approval. (Note: The ClinDrugTrialGCP and BioequivTrial also refer to the sponsor as “organizations and individuals with clinical trial drugs” or “donor”.)

As per the ClinDrugTrial and PharmLaw-VNM, the scope of the MOH’s assessment includes all clinical trials (Phases I-IV) for the following:

Drugs that contain a new active ingredient, or products with a new combination of marketed ingredients
Newly developed biologics or biologics with a new combination of marketed ingredients
Newly developed vaccines that are manufactured and used for the first time in Vietnam
Drugs, biologics, and vaccines which have been legally marketed for a period of less than five (5) years in the country of origin (or a country of reference if provided for under international treaties to which Vietnam is a signatory)
Drugs, biologics, and vaccines for which a clinical trial has been conducted, but have not met the MOH’s or internationally recognized good clinical practice (GCP) requirements
In addition, per the TradMedicine, the MOH also reviews and approves traditional medicines to be used in clinical trials (Phases I-IV) unless deemed exempt by the agency. The category of traditional medicine includes drugs developed from a provincial-level scientific research project or higher, drugs that were granted a certificate, or drugs used for treatment at health establishments at a provincial level or higher for 10 years or more and for 200 or more patients. The drugs must also have been approved by a Science and Technology Council or an EC specialized in traditional medicine as effective and safe to treat traditional medical diseases. Traditional medicines also include ancient methods.

For information on bioequivalence trials and testing, see the BioequivTrial and the BioTestReq.

Note: The ClinDrugTrial has been partially repealed by the ClinDrugTrialGCP, and Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP has been amended and replaced by the Appendix in the BioequivTrial.

Clinical Trial Review Process

Registration Dossier Review

According to the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the ASTT requires the sponsor to submit a clinical trial registration dossier. Upon receipt of the appropriate files, the ASTT will check the validity of the dossier. If the dossier is incomplete, the ASTT will provide a written notice and specific instructions for the sponsor to supplement the dossier. The sponsor is responsible for coordinating with the ASTT to complete the dossier within a maximum of 60 days from the date of receipt of the written notice. Past this time limit, the submitted application is no longer valid. Following the review of a complete and valid dossier, the ASTT Director will either issue a written approval (see Form 13 in Appendix III of the ClinDrugTrialGCP) or clearly state the reason for disapproval in writing.

See the Submission Process, Submission Content, and Timeline of Review sections for more information on registration dossiers.

Approval Dossier Review

Per the ClinDrugTrialGCP, research institutions must submit dossiers requesting clinical drug trial approval to the ASTT. The ASTT checks the validity of the dossier, and if it is incomplete, the ASTT will provide a written notice and specific instructions for the institution to supplement the dossier. The institution is responsible for coordinating with the ASTT to complete the dossier within a maximum of 60 days from the date of receipt of the written notice. Past this time limit, the research approval procedure must be repeated from the beginning.

The ClinDrugTrialGCP states that following receipt of a complete and valid dossier, the MOH will organize a meeting of the NECBR. After receiving the NECBR’s evaluation report of the research protocol, the ASTT will synthesize and complete the dossier, then submit it to the Minister of Health for approval if the protocol meets the requirements. If the protocol is not approved or needs correction, the ASTT will notify the institution in writing and clearly state the reason. If the protocol needs to be modified, the institution is responsible for coordinating with the ASTT to complete the dossier in up to 90 days from the date of receipt of the written notice. Past this time limit, the protocol approval procedure must be repeated from the beginning.

Procedures for the approval of research protocol amendments follow the same procedure described above for clinical drug trial approval. For more information, see the ClinDrugTrialGCP.

See Submission Process, Submission Content, and Timeline of Review sections for more information on the approval dossier.

Inspection

According to the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the ASTT conducts initial and ongoing periodic GCP assessments of facilities/establishments conducting clinical trials. An ASTT assessment team conducts a practical assessment of the implementation of GCP at the clinical trial facility and prepares a GCP Compliance Assessment Report (see Form 2 in Appendix III of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), which finds that the facility meets GCP, needs to make corrections/improvements, or does not comply with GCP. Based on the results of the report, the ASTT may issue a GCP certificate (see Form 3 in Appendix III of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), impose sanctions, and/or request that the Minister of Health revoke the facility’s GCP certificate. The ASTT publishes a list of GCP-compliant facilities, and the Minister of Health ensures that assessment team members meet specific conflict-of-interest and qualification standards. Additionally, the ASTT may conduct unscheduled assessments at the request of the MOH under certain conditions, based on the test drug’s level of risk for affecting participant health and the level of compliance with GCP.

See Appendix III of the ClinDrugTrialGCP for additional related forms. See the ClinDrugTrialGCP and the ASTT-GCPAssess for additional details on the ASTT’s GCP assessments.

The BioequivTrial indicates that the ASTT may also conduct inspections to ensure the rights and health of participants in the trial, ensure the quality and integrity of the research data, ensure that the responsibilities of stakeholders in the research are implemented in accordance with applicable regulations, and promptly detect violations of the research protocol. The MOH will determine the inspection scale and frequency based on the objective, purpose, design, complexity, blinding technique, scale, and end date of the research. The MOH must send an inspection notice to the sponsor and institution at least five (5) days before the inspection, and the inspection report must be completed and sent to the sponsor and institution within 20 days of the inspection.

Clinical Trial Exemptions

The DrugRgstrtn indicates that the Minister of Health may exempt new drugs and vaccines from certain phases of a clinical trial based on the opinion of the MOH’s Advisory Council in the following cases:

To meet urgent needs for national defense, security, epidemic prevention and control, and overcoming the consequences of natural calamities and catastrophes for which other drugs are not yet available on the market
To treat rare and serious diseases
The drug has been licensed for circulation by at least one (1) of the reference regulatory agencies specified in Article 2 of the DrugRgstrtn based on clinical records exempted according to the regulations of these agencies
The DrugRgstrtn adds that the new drugs and vaccines must simultaneously meet the following criteria:

The drug has been licensed for circulation in at least one (1) country in the world
There is clinical data that is not complete or there is complete clinical data, as prescribed in Article 18 of the DrugRgstrtn, but there is no full assessment of racial factors that may affect the safety and effectiveness of the drug
The DrugRgstrtn further indicates that certain generic drugs, new drugs (except vaccines), and herbal medicines that have been granted a circulation registration certificate before January 1, 2017 are exempt from clinical trials. See the DrugRgstrtn and the PharmLaw-VNM for more information on drugs that are exempted from a trial or certain phases of a trial.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
No information is currently available regarding fees required to submit a clinical trial application for authorization to the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT).

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Overview

As per the ECReg, the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), and PharmLaw-VNM, Vietnam requires institutional and national level ethics committee (EC) approval for clinical trials. According to the ECReg, institutional level EC approval is provided by a Council of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level (CEBRGL). PharmLaw-VNM states that national level EC approval is conducted by the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (NECBR).

Ethics Committee Composition

The ECReg details general EC requirements applicable to both the CEBRGLs and the NECBR, as well as specific requirements for each type of EC.

Per the ECReg, EC membership should have at least five (5) members, ensuring gender principles, and include the following:

Members with expertise in the health sector and independent from the organization/institution that established the EC
Members that are clinicians
Members with experience in reviewing legal documents
Members not in the health sector
Members under 50 years old and members aged 50 or older
The ECReg further indicates that the EC cannot include the head of the organization/institution that established the EC. The EC may include alternate members, which must meet the same standards and have the same responsibilities as the EC members. Members with expertise in the health sector and members with experience in reviewing legal documents must have a university degree or higher, and members who are not specialized in the health sector must have a college degree or higher. Members must also have an understanding of Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and the EC’s standard operating procedures (SOPs).

According to the ECReg, the EC’s professional and administrative secretaries must be honest and objective. Furthermore, professional secretaries must have a university degree or higher in the health sector, as well as an understanding of GCP principles and the EC’s SOPs. Administrative secretaries must have a college degree or higher and knowledge of the EC’s SOPs.

Council of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level

The ECReg states that a CEBRGL consists of one (1) chair, at least one (1) vice chair, EC members, alternate members (if any), a standing body, and specialized subcommittees (when necessary). The number of vice chairs, EC members, alternate members (if any), professional secretaries, administrative secretaries, and professional subcommittees are specified in the CEBRGL's SOPs. The head of the organization/institution that establishes the CEBRGL assigns a unit to act as the standing member of the CEBRGL.

The CEBRGLReg further indicates that CEBRGLs may have at most 11 members. All members must be honest, objective, and have biomedical research ethics knowledge and expertise. The chair and vice chair should be prestigious scientists.

The ECReg requires that the chair and vice chair(s) have a university degree or higher in the health sector and at least 10 years of working experience related to the relevant research field as assessed by the EC. They must also have a good reputation, and the ability to manage, synthesize, and unify opinions to achieve consensus among EC members. The chair and vice chair(s) must have an understanding of GCP principles and the SOPs of the EC. An individual cannot be appointed as the chair of the EC for more than two (2) consecutive terms.

According to the CEBRGLReg, a secretariat based in the host institution’s Science Research Management Office should assist the CEBRGL with application processing and other administrative tasks.

See the ECReg and the CEBRGLReg for additional CEBRGL membership criteria.

National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research

The ECReg requires the NECBR to have one (1) chair, at least three (3) vice chairs, members, alternate members (if any), specialized subcommittees, and the National Ethics Committee Office. The National Ethics Committee Office, a supporting agency of the NECBR, is located at the MOH’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT). The National Ethics Committee Office consists of a chief of office, deputy chief(s) of office, a chief accountant working part-time, and officers.

The ECReg indicates that the number of NECBR vice chairs, members, alternate members, professional secretaries, administrative secretaries, and professional subcommittees, as well as the number of National Ethics Committee Office deputy chiefs of office and office staff, are specified in the NECBR’s SOPs. The ASTT is the standing body of the NECBR. However, NECBR membership must not include civil servants of the MOH.

The ECReg further requires that the chair and vice chair(s) have a doctorate degree or higher in the health sector and at least 15 years of working experience related to the relevant research field as assessed by the NECBR. They must also have a good reputation, and the ability to manage, synthesize, and unify opinions to achieve consensus among NECBR members. The chair and vice chair(s) must have an understanding of GCP principles and the SOPs of the NECBR. An individual cannot be appointed as the chair of the NECBR for more than two (2) consecutive terms.

See the ECReg for additional NECBR membership criteria and VNM-1 for the list of 2023-2028 NECBR term members. Additionally, see VNM-14 for a list of NECBR SOPs.

Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

According to the ECReg, both CEBRGLs and the NECBR have five (5) year terms. However, the CEBRGLReg indicates that CEBRGLs have three (3) to five (5) year terms, as specified in the EC’s establishment decision. The ECReg also stipulates that the EC for the next consecutive term must include at least 20% new members.

As stated in the ECReg, EC activities are non-profit. When reviewing research involving humans, the EC must fully apply the ethical principles prescribed in the ECReg, the EC’s operating regulations, the EC’s SOPs, and relevant legal regulations. In addition, ECs operate on the principles of collective, democratic, and independent conduct when evaluating research proposals and making decisions. If necessary, ECs may invite an independent consultant to review the application and attend the EC meeting.

According to the ECReg, a full procedural review requires at least five (5) EC members to attend the meeting and vote, including at least one (1) member with appropriate expertise in the health sector, one (1) member without expertise in the health sector, one (1) independent member, and members of both genders. For ECs with a professional subcommittee, the meeting must have at least two (2) members of the appropriate professional subcommittee attending the meeting and voting. The study is only approved when there are less than two (2) negative votes out of the total number of valid votes. In case it is difficult to reach consensus in the review meeting, the EC chair has the right to decide to proceed with the vote immediately or request the principal investigator to complete the research dossier for the EC to review and vote in the next EC meeting. In case the EC’s meeting to review research documents does not ensure the number and structure of members as prescribed, the EC’s leaders may invite alternate members to participate in reviewing research documents and vote as EC members. Additionally, EC members may not review research in which they or a relative/close associate has a conflict of interest. See the ECReg for more details.

In addition, the ECReg states that ECs must conduct periodic assessments of clinical trials at least once a year. The EC’s chair must promulgate operating regulations for the EC, which must specify the order and procedures for evaluating research according to the full process and the expedited/shortened process. The EC’s chair must also approve and publicly announce the EC’s SOPs to achieve consensus in their establishment, the training of EC members, and the performance of specific tasks and duties of the EC. Additionally, the EC must make public the ethical guidelines for biomedical research it uses and keep information related to research confidential.

As set forth in CEBRGLReg, the CEBRGLs should operate within written SOPs to conduct their reviews. The chair oversees the meetings, makes conclusions, and reports this information to the institutional head. Voting members must have no conflict of interest with the research. The CEBRGL members must review research documentation and prepare comments for the secretary prior to the meeting. Most CEBRGLs do not meet regularly but instead meet upon request for review and on the availability of the majority of its members. The CEBRGLs should also refer to the NECBR’s SOPs to develop their own SOPs. See CEBRGLReg for detailed CEBRGL review procedures.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Overview

According to the ECReg, the CEBRGLReg, the ClinDrugTrialGCP, and the PharmLaw-VNM, the primary scope of information assessed by ethics committees (ECs) relates to maintaining and protecting the dignity and rights of research participants and ensuring their safety throughout their participation in a clinical trial. The ECs involved in clinical trial approval in Vietnam include institutional level ECs, called Councils of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level (CEBRGLs), and the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (NECBR).

As per the ECReg, the CEBRGLReg, and the PharmLaw-VNM, ECs must also pay special attention to reviewing informed consent and to protecting the welfare of certain classes of participants deemed to be vulnerable or those with limited or no legal capacity. The ECReg further indicates that when considering research involving vulnerable groups, representatives of the research participants or experts with knowledge and experience working with the groups must participate in the EC meeting. (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; and Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates sections for additional information about these populations.)

The ECReg and the CEBRGLReg state that CEBRGLs and the NECBR are responsible for reviewing the ethics and science of biomedical research involving humans. According to the CEBRGLReg, CEBRGLs must act in the interests of the potential research participants and the communities involved by evaluating the possible risks and expected benefits to participants; confirming the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, and methods; and verifying the adequacy of confidentiality and privacy safeguards. See the ECReg and the CEBRGLReg for detailed ethical review guidelines.

The ECReg indicates that when assessing research before implementation, ECs should evaluate the following:

Research design and data collection
Pre-clinical and clinical research results (if applicable)
Potential risks and benefits of the research or research product (if applicable)
Impact of the research on the community with research participants
Selection of research populations and advertising used in recruiting potential participants
Process of providing information and obtaining research information and volunteer forms
Financial benefits and financial costs related to research participants
Protection of the research participants’ privacy and confidentiality
Process of monitoring, evaluating, and handling adverse events (for research involving intervention on research participants)
Researcher qualifications and research site
See the ECReg and the Progress Reporting section for additional information on what ECs should consider when reviewing ongoing research and research result reports.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

As delineated in the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the MOH’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT) is responsible for reviewing the clinical trial registration and study approval dossiers for completeness. Evidence of institutional EC approval from a CEBRGL is a required element of the study approval dossier, so CEBRGL and ASTT approval cannot be conducted in parallel. Additionally, the NECBR’s review of the protocol is initiated by the MOH as part of the ASTT’s study approval dossier review procedures. Per the ClinDrugTrialGCP and the PharmLaw-VNM, the ASTT’s review is finalized once NECBR approval is obtained and the entire study approval dossier is sent to the Minister of Health for final approval.

The ECReg indicates that CEBRGLs are responsible for reviewing clinical trial documents before submitting them to the NECBR. For institutions conducting research involving humans that do not have a CEBRGL, the review and evaluation of the research is performed by a CEBRGL appropriate to the research field.

The ECReg indicates that ECs may review a research dossier or application under an expedited/shortened process if:

The research involves minimal risk
The research documents were completed according to a previous review’s results
The research documents have been reviewed and approved by another institutional EC
It is a periodic or ad hoc report for research that has already been approved
It is an application for amendment and supplementation of a research protocol that has already been approved
It is reporting adverse events occurring in research that has already been approved
It is reporting violations of an approved research protocol
According to the ECReg, research dossiers are reviewed under the EC’s full process if they do not qualify for expedited/shortened review as stipulated above, or if the EC chair requests that the dossier be examined according to the full process. See the Ethics Committee and Timeline of Review sections for more information on the expedited and full review processes.

The ECReg indicates that within five (5) working days of the results of its assessment, the EC must send a written notification of its evaluation to the leading research institution and principal investigator (PI). The EC may approve, conditionally approve, or decide not to approve a research dossier, and the written notifications must be issued accordingly (see Appendices I, IV, and V of the ECReg). See the ECReg for more information on the EC’s review of amendments or supplements to the research outline.

Per the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), for administrative changes to the clinical trial protocol, the research institution must report in writing to the ECs at all levels and the ASTT. Changes that do not affect the health and interests of trial participants, or the research designs, processes, and procedures, must be approved by the CEBRGL and the NECBR. The application and evaluation process are carried out in accordance with the provisions of the ECReg. Changes affecting the health and interests of trial participants, or the research designs, processes, and procedures, must be approved by competent regulatory agencies. The application for approval of changes and procedures must comply with the ClinDrugTrialGCP. See the ECReg and the ClinDrugTrialGCP for more information.

For internal NECBR forms and documents, see VNM-3.

According to the BioequivTrial, ECs may also conduct periodic or unscheduled inspections. The sponsor and EC should determine the scale and frequency of the inspections based on the objectives and design of the research. The purpose of the inspection should be to evaluate trial conduct and PI/study team compliance with the protocol, standard operating procedures (SOPs), good clinical practice (GCP), and other applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor or the EC must send an inspection notice to the institution and PI at least five (5) days before the inspection, and the inspection report must be completed and sent to the institution and PI within 20 days of the inspection.

The ECReg indicates that the EC must conduct periodic reviews, at least once a year, of ongoing clinical trials. The EC monitors and supervises research through direct supervision at the research site or through reviewing progress reports, reviewing research results, conducting periodic reviews, and conducting ad hoc reviews of the research. The EC’s monitoring and supervision content includes reviewing: compliance with procedures and standards for recruiting research participants; the protection of rights, safety, and health of research participants; and the collection of biological samples, information, and research data from research participants.

The ECReg further states that the NECBR and CEBRGLs are responsible for assessing the recording, reporting, and handling of adverse events occurring during the study.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
As stated in the ECReg, ethics committees (ECs) should issue guidelines indicating the research application appraisal fee (if any).

According to VNM-12, the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (NECBR) and institutional level ECs (known as Councils of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level (CEBRGLs)) charge a fee to review clinical trial documentation. The current NECBR and CEBRGL fees are $1,000-$2,000 USD.

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Overview

The ECReg requires that institutional level ethics committees (ECs), known as Councils of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level (CEBRGLs) in Vietnam, notify the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT) regarding their establishment and consolidation according to the form in Appendix VI of the ECReg. The EC must also update the information on the institution’s website within 15 days from the date of the decision to establish or consolidate the EC.

Registration, Auditing, and Accreditation

The ECReg indicates that the ASTT is responsible for maintaining a list of ECs on the ASTT website. The ASTT must update the list within 15 days from the date of receiving a notice of establishment from the EC. ECs are periodically inspected by the ASTT to ensure that they comply with the requirements specified in the ECReg. If the EC is found to be noncompliant, the ASTT will withdraw the EC’s name from the updated list on the website. The ASTT may suspend, or propose suspension to a competent authority, of an EC’s operation in case it is found that the EC violates the provisions of the ECReg, affecting the protection of rights, safety, and health of research participants.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the ClinDrugTrialGCP, PharmLaw-VNM, and ASTTReg, Vietnam requires the applicant to obtain clinical trial authorization from the Ministry of Health (MOH). The Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT) is the department within the MOH that manages the clinical trial review process. As delineated in the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the MOH’s national level ethics committee (EC), the National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (NECBR), must also approve the research protocol.

As per the ClinDrugTrialGCP, evidence of institutional EC approval from a Council of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level (CEBRGL) is a required element of the study approval dossier submitted to the ASTT, so CEBRGL and ASTT approval cannot be conducted in parallel. Additionally, the NECBR’s review of the protocol is initiated by the MOH as part of the ASTT’s study approval dossier review procedures. Per the ClinDrugTrialGCP and the PharmLaw-VNM, ASTT review is finalized once NECBR approval is obtained and the entire study approval dossier is sent to the Minister of Health for final approval.

Regulatory Submission

According to VNM-12, the registration dossier and the study approval dossier should be submitted to the MOH’s ASTT at the address found in VNM-11:

Ministry of Health
Administration of Science, Technology and Training
No. 138B Giang Vo
Ba Dinh District
Hanoi City, Vietnam

As per the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the sponsor must submit, directly or via post, one (1) copy of the clinical trial registration dossier signed by the sponsor’s representative(s) to the ASTT. Separately, research institution(s) must submit one (1) copy of the study approval dossier, signed by the principal investigator (PI) and the head of the testing facility, directly or via post to the ASTT. See Appendix III of the ClinDrugTrialGCP for the registration form and the forms that comprise the study approval dossier. (Note: The ClinDrugTrialGCP also refers to the sponsor as “organizations and individuals with clinical trial drugs” or “donor” throughout the document.)

As delineated in the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the clinical trial application and accompanying material must be provided in Vietnamese or English. If the document is not available in Vietnamese or English, a notarized translation of the document must be provided in Vietnamese or English. The ClinDrugTrialGCP also indicates that the Investigator’s Brochure (IB) summary (also referred to as the research product profile in Vietnam) submitted to the MOH with the registration application should be in Vietnamese or in English with a supplementary summary in Vietnamese. See the Submission Content section for detailed information on documentation to be submitted.

Ethics Review Submission

As per VNM-12, the application for NECBR approval should also be submitted at the address found in VNM-11:

Ministry of Health
Administration of Science, Technology and Training
No. 138B Giang Vo
Ba Dinh District
Hanoi City, Vietnam

VNM-12 indicates that for NECBR review, the applicant must submit four (4) copies of the relevant documents directly or via post to the ASTT. Except for the IB, the Certificate of Analysis, and the good manufacturing practices (GMP) certificate, which may be in English, all relevant documents must be submitted in Vietnamese.

According to the ECReg, ECs issue their own guidelines on the requirements for submitting research applications for review. See the Submission Content section for the minimum requirements of the EC evaluation guidelines.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

As per the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the following documentation must be submitted to the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT) for clinical trial registration dossiers:

Clinical trial registration application form signed by a representative of the sponsor (See Form No. 6 in Appendix III of the ClinDrugTrialGCP)
Summary of the Investigator’s Brochure (IB) (also referred to as the research product profile in Vietnam) including general information about the clinical reagent (name, ingredients, indications, physical properties, chemistry, preparation, and other relevant information), pre-clinical research materials, and clinical trial study documents from previous phases
For clinical trial study approval dossiers, the ClinDrugTrialGCP indicates that the following documentation must be submitted to the MOH’s ASTT:

Clinical trial approval application form signed by the principal investigator (PI) and the head of the research institution (See Form No. 7 in Appendix III of the ClinDrugTrialGCP)
Full IB, including proof of compliance with Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) for research institutions or proof of compliance with Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) for drug manufacturers, and proof of compliance with quality testing requirements from national inspection agencies or ex-warehousing certificates for vaccine or biological batches (Refer to the Quality Requirements section for detailed IB requirements)
A copy of the written approval for clinical trial registration from the MOH’s ASTT
For phase IV clinical trials, a certified or notarized copy of the written request for phase IV clinical drug testing from the respective regulatory authorities
A certified or notarized copy of the research institution’s certificate of eligibility for pharmaceutical business
Certification of participation by all study sites for multicenter research studies in Vietnam
A certified or notarized copy of the approval from the People’s Provincial Committee (for community-based studies)
Contract/agreement between the sponsor and the host institution; and contract/agreement between sponsor and the contract research organization (CRO), if applicable
Explanation of study protocol (See Form No. 8 in Appendix III of the ClinDrugTrialGCP)
Case report form (CRF)
PI’s Curriculum Vitae (CV) and a copy of the Good Clinical Practice (GCP) certificate issued by the MOH or an institution recognized by the MOH
Informed Consent Form (ICF) (See Form No. 9 in Appendix III of the ClinDrugTrialGCP) (See also the Required Elements section for additional information)
Council of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level (CEBRGL) evaluation report
Investigational product (IP) labeling
See the ClinDrugTrialGCP for detailed requirements.

Ethics Committee Requirements

The ECReg indicates that both the institutional level ethics committees (ECs) (CEBRGLs) and the national EC (National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (NECBR)) issue their own guidelines on the requirements for the review of research application submissions. The guidelines include information on the following:

Name and address of the secretary, staff, or member of the EC receiving the application file, or address of the website receiving the online application (if any)
List of all written material in the file
Specifications of the documents
Language of the documents in the file
Number of copies to be submitted
Application deadline compared to review date
Notification method for invalid documents
Time limit for submitting additional documents (if necessary)
Expected time to announce the review results
The required format of the forms to be submitted as prescribed by the EC (if any)
Research appraisal fee (if any)
See the ECReg and the Scope of Review section for information on what ECs should consider when reviewing research before implementation, ongoing research, and research result reports.

Clinical Protocol

As per the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the MOH requires the following elements to be included in a protocol submission:

Title
Protocol code
Duration
Management level (state/ministry/institution/province)
PI/co-investigator(s) names and contact information
Funding
Phase requested
Institution to conduct research
Sponsor and contact information
Situation of domestic and foreign research
Objectives
Methodology (including trial design, random selection method, and standard operating procedures (SOPs) for each research technique)
Participant selection/withdrawal
Participant treatment
AE reporting requirements (See the Safety Reporting section for additional information)
Laboratory test methods
Ethical considerations
Inspection and monitoring
Post study medical care
Study team training
International cooperation
Implementation progress
Format of the expected results
Activities of coordinating organizations
See Appendix III in the ClinDrugTrialGCP for a copy of the full form.

Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Overview

As per the ClinDrugTrialGCP, evidence of institutional ethics committee (EC) approval from a Council of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level (CEBRGL) is a required element of the study approval dossier submitted to the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT), so CEBRGL and ASTT approval cannot be conducted in parallel. Additionally, the National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (NECBR)’s review of the protocol is initiated by the MOH as part of the ASTT’s study approval dossier review procedures. Per the ClinDrugTrialGCP and the PharmLaw-VNM, ASTT review is finalized once NECBR approval is obtained and the entire study approval dossier is sent to the Minister of Health for final approval.

Regulatory Authority Approval

Registration Dossier Review

As delineated in the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the ASTT initially checks the validity of the sponsor-submitted registration dossier (which includes the registration application form and Investigator’s Brochure (IB) summary) within five (5) working days from the date of receipt of the application. If any issues are identified, the ASTT will issue a written notice to the sponsor, who must coordinate with the ASTT to complete the dossier within 60 days of receipt. Past this time limit, the submitted application is no longer valid. The ASTT Director will issue a written decision within five (5) working days of receiving a complete and valid dossier.

Approval Dossier Review

The ClinDrugTrialGCP indicates that research institutions must submit dossiers requesting clinical drug trial approval to the ASTT. The ASTT checks the validity of the study approval dossier within five (5) working days from the date of receipt of the application. If any issues are identified, the ASTT will issue a written notice to the institution, which must coordinate with the ASTT to complete the dossier within 60 days of receipt. Past this time limit, the research approval procedure must be repeated from the beginning.

The ClinDrugTrialGCP states that within 25 days of receiving a complete and valid study approval dossier, the MOH will organize a meeting of the NECBR. Within five (5) working days after receiving the NECBR’s evaluation report, the ASTT gathers all materials related to the dossier and submits it to the Minister of Health for approval.

If the research protocol is not approved or needs to be corrected, the ASTT must notify the institution and state the reason, as per the ClinDrugTrialGCP. The institution must coordinate with the ASTT to complete the dossier within 90 days from the date of the notice. Past this time limit, the protocol approval procedure must be repeated from the beginning. Within five (5) working days after receiving the completed research protocol in accordance with the written notice, the ASTT gathers all materials related to the dossier and submits it to the Minister of Health for approval.

Ethics Committee Approval

According to the ECReg, ECs issue their own guidelines on the requirements for submitting research applications for review. See the Submission Content section for detailed information on minimum requirements for the EC guidelines.

According to VNM-12, the review and approval process for CEBRGLs takes 30 days. Meetings are scheduled upon request and are based on the availability of the majority of its members.

The ECReg indicates that within five (5) working days from the date that the research dossier evaluation results are available, the EC must send a written notification to the leading research institution and principal investigator.

See Scope of Review section for details on the EC’s role in the clinical trial approval process.

Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Overview

As delineated in the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the PharmLaw-VNM, and the ASTTReg, a clinical trial can only commence in Vietnam after authorization from the Ministry of Health (MOH) has been received. The MOH’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT) manages the clinical trial review process. The ClinDrugTrialGCP indicates that the ASTT is responsible for reviewing the clinical trial registration and study approval dossiers. The MOH’s national level ethics committee (EC), the National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (NECBR), is responsible for approving the research protocol. Once the ASTT has completed its review and the NECBR has reviewed and approved the research protocol, the Minister of Health must give final approval to the entire study approval dossier. The ECReg further indicates that institutional level ECs, known as Councils of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level (CEBRGLs) in Vietnam, are responsible for reviewing clinical trial documents before submitting them to the NECBR. For institutions conducting research involving humans that do not have a CEBRGL, the review and evaluation of the research is performed by a CEBRGL appropriate to the research field.

As per the ExprtImprtMeds, an import license must be obtained for the shipment of an investigational product (IP) to be used in the trial from the MOH’s Drug Administration of Vietnam (DAV). See the Manufacturing & Import section for additional information.

Clinical Trial Agreement

As per the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), the sponsor is required to enter an agreement with the participating principal investigator (PI)/host institution(s) before the trial begins to demonstrate the financial agreement between the parties. The PharmLaw-VNM also states that the sponsor is required to sign a clinical trial contract with the investigator(s).

Clinical Trial Registration

According to VNM-12, the ASTT encourages the sponsor and the PI to register their study with the United States National Institutes of Health’s ClinicalTrials.gov (VNM-13).

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

As delineated in the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP) and the AERprtingD62, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Vietnam’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (or Adverse Experience) (AE) – Any untoward medical occurrence (including any signs, symptoms, illnesses, or test results) in a participant to whom a medicinal product has been administered, including occurrences which are not necessarily caused by or related to that product
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) – Any untoward medical occurrence that may lead to death, is life threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in disability or permanent incapacity, creates a congenital anomaly/birth defect, or requires appropriate medical intervention to prevent the aforementioned situations or medically important event
Unexpected AE – AEs in which the essence, severity, specificity, or consequences are different or have not been recorded or considered in the study protocol or relevant study documents
Also, according to VNM-12, the Ministry of Health (MOH) uses the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (VNM-5) to define its safety reporting terminology.

Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

As per the BioequivTrial and the AERprtingD62, the principal investigator (PI) is responsible for detecting and settling SAEs and updating AE/SAE information to ensure the timeliness of reporting and the safety of the research participants. The PI is required to report to the sponsor, the institutional ethics committee (EC), also known as a Council of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level (CEBRGL), the MOH’s National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (NECBR), the MOH’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT), and the National Centre for Drug Information and Adverse Drug Reaction Monitoring (National DI and ADR Centre).

The BioequivTrial indicates that depending on the type of AE/SAE, the PI must comply with the following reporting requirements:

Fatal or life-threatening SAEs in Vietnam: A report, in accordance with Form 4 in the Appendix of the BioequivTrial, must be submitted to the NECBR, the ASTT, and the National DI and ADR Centre within seven (7) working days from the date of receiving information about the SAE. Updates on the SAE must be provided in additional reports until the participant recovers or stabilizes.
SAEs that are not fatal or life-threatening in Vietnam: A report, in accordance with Form 4 in the Appendix of the BioequivTrial, must be submitted to the NECBR, the ASTT, and the National DI and ADR Centre within 15 working days from the date of receiving information about the SAE.
Non-serious AEs occurring in Vietnam: The AEs must be recorded and summarized in a periodical report, and reported in the full results of the trial research results to the NECBR and the ASTT.
The BioequivTrial indicates that in the event of fatal or life-threatening AEs/SAEs, the PI and the host institution are required to suspend the trial immediately, provide care and treatment to the participant(s), overcome and resolve the consequences, and document the events. According to the AERprtingD62, the PI must also document any deaths. The BioequivTrial and the AERprtingD62 further indicate that the PI and the host institution must report these events to the CEBRGL, the NECBR, the ASTT, and the National Center of DI and ADR.

For AEs that cause harm to the participant’s health, the BioequivTrial and the AERprtingD62 indicate that the PI is responsible for treating and following up on the participant’s health until the person is stable.

According to the BioequivTrial, the PI should provide periodic updates regarding AEs/SAEs to the sponsor, the CEBRGL, the NECBR, the ASTT, and the National Center of DI and ADR. If the extent and frequency of AEs/SAEs exceeds the allowable limit, investigators may propose to the sponsor, EC, and competent regulatory authority that the clinical trial be suspended.

The BioequivTrial and the AERprtingD62 indicate that all of the following must be reported:

SAEs occurring at study sites in Vietnam
SAEs occurring at study sites outside of Vietnam in a multicenter Vietnamese study that lead to cessation/suspension of the study or a change in the protocol
All other AEs occurring in clinical drug trials at study sites in Vietnam
Sponsor Responsibilities

Per the BioequivTrial and the AERprtingD62, the sponsor must coordinate with the PI to report AEs/SAEs occurring at study sites in Vietnam to the CEBRGL, the NECBR, the ASTT, and the National Center of DI and ADR. The sponsor must collect AE/SAE data.

For SAEs occurring at study sites outside of Vietnam in a multicenter Vietnamese study, the BioequivTrial states that the sponsor must report to the NECBR, the ASTT, and the National Center of DI and ADR within 10 working days from the date of a decision to stop/suspend the study, withdraw participants from the study, or change the research protocol.

In addition, the AERprtingD62 requires that the sponsor report findings from clinical trials, epidemiology studies, in vitro studies, information in the medical literature, and other sources of information, if the findings suggest an important risk related to the investigational product.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

Per the BioequivTrial, SAEs in Vietnam should be reported using a Reporting Form for SAEs in Clinical Trials (Appendix, Form 4).

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

According to the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), investigators are responsible for providing periodic and unscheduled reports.

The ECReg states that ethics committees (EC) should evaluate the following content when reviewing ongoing research:

Compliance with the approved research protocol
Protection of rights, health, and safety of research participants
Recording, handling, and reporting of adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs) occurring during the study (if any)
Violation of the research protocol and remediation and prevention of violations (if any)
Amendments and/or supplements to the research protocol and related documents (if any)
Final Report

The BioequivTrial and the ClinDrugTrialGCP indicate that the principal investigator (PI), the sponsor, and the host institution are responsible for submitting a final report to the Ministry of Health (MOH) when a study is completed. The final report, which must include an analysis of the data and information on AEs/ SAEs, must be submitted in accordance with Form No. 12 in Appendix III of the ClinDrugTrialGCP. The BioequivTrial further states that the clinical trial results must be made public within three (3) years from the date of issuance of the competent authorities' decision approving the results, and should comply with applicable copyright regulations.

The ECReg states that the EC should evaluate the following content when reviewing reports of the research results:

Compliance with the research protocol during implementation
Integrity, accuracy, and reliability of research data
Scientific and accurate nature of research results report
As per the ECReg, the EC may approve, conditionally approve, or decide not to approve a research result report. See Appendices III-V of the ECReg for each form, respectively.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
As per the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), the sponsor is defined as an organization or individual that owns research drugs, has a need to conduct clinical drug trials, and has a commitment to provide funding for clinical drug trials. (Note: The ClinDrugTrialGCP and the BioequivTrial also refer to the sponsor as “organizations and individuals with clinical trial drugs” or “donor”.)

In addition, per the PharmLaw-VNM, the sponsor may select a qualified contract research organization (CRO) (also known as a research support organization in Vietnam) to run the clinical trial. The ClinTrialSup defines a CRO as an organization with the legal status to operate in the field of clinical trial research support and that is staffed with appropriately qualified personnel.

According to the ClinTrialSup, CROs may perform clinical research support activities such as implementing sponsors’ clinical research responsibilities, carrying out administrative support activities, and conducting clinical research monitoring. The ClinDrugTrialGCP indicates that a cooperative contract should exist between the sponsor and a CRO, if applicable. According to the PharmLaw-VNM, a sponsor and the CRO may be domestic or foreign.

In addition, as per the ClinTrialSup, CROs are also responsible for registering their organizations with the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT). Before implementing any activities in support of a clinical trial, a CRO must submit a registration dossier and the applicable forms for approval. The CRO is also required to report annually on its clinical research activities to the MOH’s ASTT. (See the ClinTrialSup for detailed information on clinical trial research support activities and the related registration forms.)

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Overview

As set forth in the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP) and PharmLaw-VNM, the sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s), the principal investigator (PI), the consultant experts, and the research institutions, taking into account the appropriateness and availability of the study site and facilities.

As stated in the BioequivTrial, all investigators must possess appropriate qualifications, training, and experience. All investigators involved in the trial must obtain completion certificates for a good clinical practice (GCP) course and a safety reporting course, each to be updated every three (3) years, from the Ministry of Health (MOH) or an authorized training facility.

See the BioequivTrial for information on PI and investigator rights and responsibilities.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

No information is currently available on foreign sponsor requirements.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

According to VNM-12, there are no requirements for establishing a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB). However, the MOH’s National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (NECBR) may recommend the establishment of a DSMB.

Multicenter Studies

The BioequivTrial states that for multicenter studies, in addition to analyzing general research results, it is necessary to conduct a separate analysis of key safety and efficacy variables on Asian or Vietnamese research populations using drugs for which racial factors are considered to have an effect on efficiency and safety. Furthermore, per the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the clinical trial study approval dossier must include documentation certifying the participation of research institutions in multicenter studies in Vietnam.

Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Insurance

According to VNM-12, there is no specific Vietnamese guidance that addresses indemnity agreements between the sponsor and the contract research organization (CRO), investigator(s), or institution(s). However, the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP) lists an insurance contract as an essential document to be obtained by the principal investigator (PI), institution, and sponsor before conducting a clinical trial. The purpose of the insurance contract is to ensure that research participants will be compensated in the event of a trial-related injury.

Compensation

Injury or Death

As specified in the PharmLaw-VNM, the sponsor is responsible for providing compensation to research participants in the event of trial-related injuries. The BioequivTrial also states investigators are responsible for compensating participants when an adverse event that seriously impacts the participant’s health was caused by the investigator’s violation of the research protocol.

Trial Participation

According to the BioequivTrial, payment and compensation, if any, to clinical trial participants must be clearly indicated in the research protocol.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

As stated in the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), the sponsor is responsible for assigning a monitor to assist in maintaining a quality assurance (QA) system with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) that ensure trials are conducted and data are generated, recorded, and reported in compliance with the protocol. In addition, the quality management system applied in clinical trials must meet International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 9001-equivalent standards or higher.

Per the BioequivTrial, the principal investigator (PI) is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, truthfulness, confidentiality, integrity, and verifiability of the research data. Correction of data must be in accordance with applicable regulations, which indicate that the original data should not be deleted, and the assigned researcher must record their name, sign for confirmation, and specify the date of correction. The lead investigator must submit an encrypted list of trial participants to the regulatory agency after the clinical trial ends. The retention and submission of the list of participants after decryption must be kept secret.

The trials should be conducted in compliance with good clinical practice (GCP) principles and standards outlined in the ClinDrugTrialGCP and the BioequivTrial Appendix, which are based on the International Council for Harmonisation's Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (VNM-5) and the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice for Trials on Pharmaceutical Products (Please refer to Annex 3 of The Use of Essential Drugs: Sixth Report of the WHO Expert Committee for these guidelines (VNM-10)).

Monitoring Requirements

As part of its QA system, the BioequivTrial states that the sponsor should assign a monitor to inspect the trial. The sponsor should appoint individuals who are independent from the trial and are qualified by training and experience to conduct inspections, in accordance with the ClinTrialSup. The ClinDrugTrialGCP further indicates that SOPs, the monitoring/inspection plan, and procedures must also be submitted to the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT).

According to the ClinDrugTrialGCP, clinical trial facilities/establishments must apply and comply with GCP. Facilities providing clinical drug trial services and facilities with non-commercial clinical drug trial activities must submit a dossier to the ASTT requesting initial assessment of compliance with GCP together with the appraisal fee as prescribed by the Minister of Finance. As part of the GCP assessment, the clinical trial facility briefly presents its organization, personnel, implementation activities, GCP application, or other items according to the content of the ASTT assessment team’s plan. The assessment team conducts a practical assessment of the implementation of GCP at the facility and prepares a GCP Compliance Assessment Report (see Form 2 in Appendix III of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), which finds that the facility meets GCP, needs to make corrections/improvements, or does not comply with GCP. In response to the GCP Compliance Assessment Report, the facility may send a written explanation disagreeing with the assessment, make corrections or repairs, and/or request a copy of an issued GCP certificate. The ASTT also conducts periodic assessments of a facility’s GCP compliance, which follow a similar format. See the ClinDrugTrialGCP and the ASTT-GCPAssess for additional details on the ASTT’s GCP assessments.

For information on ASTT and ethics committee (EC) monitoring responsibilities, see the Scope of Assessment and Scope of Review sections.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

According to the BioequivTrial, the sponsor may terminate a trial early if serious protocol violations are discovered during an inspection that affect the safety of trial participants, or, the accuracy and truthfulness of the data. The sponsor should send notices to the Council of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level (CEBRGL), the MOH’s National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (NECBR), and the relevant authority, in addition to notifying the institution and PI.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

According to the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), when using electronic trial data processing systems, the sponsor should use appropriate data handling programs and have adequate standard operating procedures (SOPs) for these systems. In addition, per the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the research institution’s general documentation must include a brief description of any electronic document system in its technical and professional standards, if applicable.

Records Management

As per the BioequivTrial, all information on clinical trials must be recorded, handled, managed, and kept in accordance with applicable regulations in order to accurately report, interpret, monitor, and check the accuracy and reliability of clinical trial information and data. Research institution facilities for storing clinical trial records and documents must ensure confidentiality; restricted access; fire and explosion prevention and control; and avoidance of adverse effects of light, temperature, humidity, and penetration of insects and other animals. In addition, research dossiers and documents should be archived and preserved according to the contract between the sponsor and the institution. For research and development of new products, documentation needs to be kept for at least 10 years.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Responsible Parties

Per Decree13, the personal data controller is an organization or individual that decides the purposes and means of processing personal data. The personal data processor is an organization or individual that performs data processing on behalf of the data controller, through a contract or agreement with the data controller. An organization or individual that both decides the purposes and means for, and directly processes, personal data is referred to as a personal data controller and processor.

Decree13 states that the personal data controller must:

Implement organizational and technical measures, as well as appropriate safety and security measures, to prove that data processing activities have been carried out in accordance with Decree13, reviewing and updating these measures as necessary
Record and store a system log of personal data processing
Notify the Ministry of Public Security (MPS) of violations of regulations on protection of personal data as prescribed in Decree13
Select a personal data processor in accordance with a clear mandate and work only with a personal data processor that has appropriate safeguards in place
Ensure the rights of data subjects as prescribed in Decree13
Additionally, Decree13 indicates that the personal data processor must:

Only receive personal data after having a contract or agreement on data processing with the personal data controller, and process personal data in accordance with the contract or agreement
Fully implement measures to protect personal data specified in Decree13 and other relevant legal documents
Delete and/or return all personal data to the personal data controller after finishing data processing
According to Decree13, both the personal data controller and processor are also responsible to the data subject for damages caused by the processing of personal data. In addition, they must cooperate with the MPS and competent state agencies in protecting personal data by providing information for investigation and handling of violations of Decree13.

Per VNM-8, the MPS is responsible for protecting the rights of data subjects against violations of Decree13, and for maintaining the National Information Portal on Personal Data Protection (VNM-7). See VNM-7 for additional personal data protection resources.

According to the DataLaw-VNM, the Prime Minister of Vietnam decides on the sharing of private data managed by ministries, ministerial-level agencies, government agencies, and provincial People's Committees in urgent and unexpected cases of natural disaster prevention and control, epidemics, fires, explosions, or other necessary cases to resolve practical issues.

See the DataLaw-VNM for more information on general data law in Vietnam.

Data Protection

Per Decree13, organizations and individuals involved in personal data processing must apply personal data protection measures to prevent unauthorized collection of personal data from translation systems and equipment. It is illegal to set up software systems, enact technical measures, or organize activities of collecting, transferring, buying, and selling personal data without the consent of data subjects.

According to Decree13, personal data protection measures must be applied from the beginning and throughout the processing of personal data, including management, technical, investigational, and procedural measures. Network security for the data processing system, as well as the means and equipment, must be checked before processing data, irrecoverably deleting data, or destroying devices containing personal data.

Decree13 states that in the case of sensitive personal data, a department with the function of protecting personal data must be designated, personnel in charge of personal data protection must be appointed, and information about the department and individual in charge of personal data protection must be exchanged with the agency specializing in personal data protection (e.g., MPS). Additionally, data subjects must be notified that their sensitive personal data is being processed.

Decree13 states that if a violation of Decree13 has been detected, the personal data controller/personal data controller and processor must notify the MPS’s Department of Cybersecurity and Prevention within 72 hours after the violation occurs using Form No. 03 (see Appendix of Decree13 or VNM-9). If the notification is submitted after 72 hours, the reason for the late notice must be attached. Additionally, the personal data processor must notify the personal data controller of the violation as quickly as possible. See Decree13 and VNM-9 for more information on notification requirements for violations of personal data protection regulations.

As per the DataLaw-VNM, any cross-border transfer and processing of data must ensure national defense, security, and protection of national interests, public interests, rights, and legitimate interests of data subjects and data owners in accordance with the provisions of Vietnamese law and international treaties to which Vietnam is a member.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

Decree13 delineates that a data subject’s consent is only valid when the data subject voluntarily and clearly knows the type of personal data to be processed; the purpose of processing personal data; that organizations and individuals are allowed to process the personal data; and the rights and obligations of data subjects. The data subject’s consent must be expressed clearly, specifically in writing, by voice, by ticking the consent box, in the syntax of consent via text message, by selecting consent technical settings, or through another action that demonstrates consent. When there are multiple purposes for the data collection, the personal data controller/personal data controller and processor must list the purposes for the data subject to agree to one (1) or more of the stated purposes, and consent must be given for each purpose. The data subject’s consent must be expressed in a format that can be printed or reproduced in writing, including in electronic or verifiable formats. Silence or non-response of the data subject is not considered as consent, and the data subject may give partial or conditional consent. The data subject’s consent is valid until the data subject decides otherwise or when the competent state agency requests in writing.

Per Decree13, data subjects also have a right to: be aware of data processing activities; access their data; delete data; restrict data processing; provision of data; object to data processing; complain, denounce, and initiate lawsuits; claim damages; and self-defense. For the processing of sensitive personal data, the data subject must be informed that the data to be processed is sensitive personal data.

Decree13 states that in certain cases, the data subject’s consent is not required for the processing of personal data. This includes urgent cases where it is necessary to immediately process relevant personal data to protect the life and health of the data subject or others, and in the event of a state of emergency on national defense, security, social order and safety, major disasters, or dangerous epidemics.

See Decree13 for more details on obtaining consent from data subjects; the rights of data subjects; and situations where consent is not required for the processing of personal data.

Withdrawal of Consent

According to Decree13, withdrawal of consent must be in a format that can be printed or reproduced in writing, including in electronic or verifiable format. Upon receiving a request from a data subject to withdraw consent, the personal data controller/personal data controller and processor must notify the data subject of possible consequences and damages that may occur when consent is withdrawn. The personal data controller, personal data processor, personal data controller and processor, and any third parties must stop, and request any relevant organizations and individuals to stop, processing the data of the data subject that has withdrawn consent. Withdrawal of consent does not affect the legality of the data processing that was agreed to prior to the withdrawal.

Children

Per Decree13, children’s personal data must be processed in accordance with the principle of protecting the rights and ensuring the best interests of the children. The processing of children’s personal data must have the consent of the child if the child is seven (7) years of age or older, as well as the consent of the parent(s) or legal guardian(s). The personal data controller, personal data processor, personal data controller and processor, and any third parties must verify the age of the children before processing the children's personal data. The relevant parties must stop processing the children’s personal data and/or irreversibly delete or destroy the children’s personal data in the following cases:

The data was processed for improper purposes, or the purpose of processing personal data with the consent of the data subject has been fulfilled, unless otherwise provided for by law
The child’s parent(s) or legal guardian(s) withdraws consent for the processing of the child’s personal data, unless otherwise provided for by law
At the request of a competent authority when there are sufficient grounds to prove that the processing of personal data affects the children’s legitimate rights and interests, unless otherwise provided for by law
Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Vietnamese clinical trials, a freely given informed consent must be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), and the PharmLaw-VNM. As per the ClinDrugTrialGCP and the BioequivTrial, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be sent to the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT) as part of the clinical trial study approval dossier, for which the Minister must issue final approval.

The ECReg indicates that a research proposal involving humans, including the ICF, must undergo ethical and scientific review by the MOH’s National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (NECBR) and an institutional level ethics committee (EC) (known as a Council of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass Root Level (CEBRGLs)).

The BioequivTrial states that the principal investigator (PI) or the clinical testing facility is responsible for obtaining written consent from trial participants before carrying out any study procedures.

According to the BioequivTrial, the informed consent information provided to participants should also be presented without coercion or unduly influencing enrollment in the clinical trial. The ClinDrugTrialGCP further states that the participant or legal representative/guardian should also be given the opportunity to ask questions about the research, and given adequate time to consider whether to participate.

Re-Consent

No information is currently available on re-consent.

Language Requirements

As delineated in the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the clinical trial application and accompanying material must be provided in Vietnamese or English. If the document is not available in Vietnamese or English, a notarized translation of the document must be provided in Vietnamese or English.

VNM-12 indicates that the ICF content should be presented in Vietnamese and English for global clinical studies, but for studies with domestic sponsors, only Vietnamese is required. The English copy serves as a reference to the NECBR. The study information sheet should be in Vietnamese.

Documenting Consent

As per the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the BioequivTrial, and the PharmLaw-VNM, the participant or the legal representative/guardian must sign and date the ICF. No information is provided in these sources concerning copies to be issued to the participant or legal representative/guardian.

Waiver of Consent

The ECReg indicates an EC may waive the requirement for voluntary consent from research participants if the study requires absolute confidentiality, or if consent cannot be obtained from the participant or legal representative/guardian. The EC’s decision to waive the voluntary consent requirement must consider the benefits and risks of the study to participants, as well as measures to protect the rights and safety of participants.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Based on the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable:

Description of research with an explanation of its purpose and objectives
Expected duration of study
Research methods to be followed
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for research participants
Identification of investigator(s) who will be responsible for assessing confidential medical information to select study participants
Number of participants involved in the study
Description of any foreseeable risks to the participant
Any expected benefits to the participant and/or the community, and any study-related payment to the participant
Alternative procedures or treatment that may be available to the participant
The extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained
Selection of those parties who will be able to access, inspect, supervise, and monitor the participant’s records
Compensation and/or medical treatment available in the event of a trial-related injury
Person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of trial participants and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
Statement that participation is voluntary and the participant may withdraw at any time for any reason
See Form No. 9 in Appendix III of the ClinDrugTrialGCP for a copy of the ICF.

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the ClinDrugTrialGCP, Vietnam’s ethical standards promote respect for all human beings and safeguard the rights of research participants. A participant’s rights must also be clearly addressed in the informed consent form (ICF) and during the informed consent process.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As stated in the ClinDrugTrialGCP and the PharmLaw-VNM, the participant or the legal representative/guardian should be informed that participation is voluntary and that the participant may withdraw from the research study at any time for any reason without being held liable.

Additionally, the PharmLaw-VNM states that participants have the responsibility to comply with investigators’ instructions according to approved clinical trial documents.

The Right to Information

As per the ClinDrugTrialGCP and the PharmLaw-VNM, a potential research participant or legal representative/guardian has the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, and any compensation or treatment in the case of injury.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

According to the ClinDrugTrialGCP and the PharmLaw-VNM, all participants must be afforded the right to privacy and confidentiality, and the ICF must provide a statement that recognizes this right.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

The ClinDrugTrialGCP states that the research participant or legal representative/guardian should be provided with contact information for a person to contact regarding trial-related inquiries.

Furthermore, the PharmLaw-VNM states that the participant has the right to file a complaint or lawsuit against any illegal acts committed by the sponsor or investigator.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

As set forth in the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), the benefits and risks or inconveniences to participants, society, or the community must be fully and carefully considered before starting a clinical trial on the basis of ensuring the safety, health, and interests of participants.

See the Required Elements and Vulnerable Populations sections for additional information regarding requirements for participant rights.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
The ECReg indicates an ethics committee (EC) may waive the requirement for voluntary consent from research participants if consent cannot be obtained from the participant or legal representative/guardian. The EC’s decision to waive the voluntary consent requirement must consider the benefits and risks of the study to participants, as well as measures to protect the rights and safety of participants.

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Overview

As per VNM-4, in all Vietnamese clinical trials, research participants selected from vulnerable populations must be provided additional protections by the ethics committee and the investigator(s) to safeguard their health and welfare during the informed consent process. VNM-4 characterizes vulnerable populations as those incapable of giving consent, which may include children, pregnant women, people with mental disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, people who are illiterate, prisoners, detainees, sex workers, and other special populations.

See the Children/Minors and Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates sections for additional information about these vulnerable populations.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
According to ChildLaw, a child is someone under 16 years of age.

As set forth in the PharmLaw-VNM, when the participant is a minor, informed consent must be obtained from the legal representative/guardian.

Assent Requirements

No information is currently available regarding assent requirements.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
The PharmLaw-VNM states that for studies involving women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, the rationale for participant selection and appropriate protection measures for these participants must be clearly stated in the study approval dossier.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
No information is currently available.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
No information is currently available.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
The ClinDrugTrial defines an investigational product (IP) as a pharmaceutical product, biomedical product, vaccine, traditional medicine, or herbal medicine that contains a new active ingredient or substance, or a product with a new combination of already marketed pharmaceutical substances.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Manufacturing

As set forth in the PharmLaw-VNM, Decree54, and the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT) has overall responsibility for authorizing the manufacture of all drug products. According to VNM-4, once the ASTT reviews and the Minister of Health approves the study approval dossier, the Drug Administration of Vietnam (DAV) coordinates with the ASTT to review and approve the investigational product (IP) for manufacture or import.

In addition, the ClinDrugTrialGCP states that IPs which are under review for phase IV clinical trials require a certified or notarized copy of the written request for phase IV clinical drug testing from the respective regulatory authorities.

Import

As delineated in the ExprtImprtMeds, the MOH’s DAV is responsible for authorizing the import and export of drugs in Vietnam. According to ExprtImprtMeds, IPs for use in clinical trials are categorized as finished drugs without registration numbers. Once the MOH approves the study approval dossier, an import permit application must be submitted to the MOH’s DAV for approval of the IP. The import permit is valid for one (1) year.

The PharmLaw-VNM further indicates that a drug/medicinal ingredient that does not have a certificate of free sale must be licensed for import with a quantity not exceeding that which is written on the import license when it is to be used in a clinical trial, a bioequivalence study, a bioavailability assessment, or as a sample for registration, testing, scientific research, or display at a fair or exhibition.

The ExprtImprtMeds and Decree54 require the following documents to be included in an import permit dossier (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Import order form (three (3) copies)
Copy of study protocol approved by the MOH
A Certificate of Pharmaceutical Product (CPP) (may be substituted with a Free Sale Certificate (FSC) or Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) certificate)
The importer’s document bearing the importer’s seal, specifying the purposes and quantity of imported drugs and commitment to use the drugs for its intended purposes
Quality standards and testing methods
Drug label(s) and instruction manual(s) with importer seal (See the Labeling section for detailed labeling requirements)
Preclinical and clinical records for drug(s) containing new pharmaceutical substances, or drug(s) with new combinations of circulating pharmaceutical substances, and an information sheet on placebo’s composition, if applicable
According to the ExprtImprtMeds, dossiers and documents attached to the order form must be prepared on size A4 paper and bound into a solid set. The records must be arranged in the order of the table of contents, with separation between the sections. The separators must be numbered for easy reference and must be affixed for certification by the importing enterprise on the first page of each section of the entire dossier and must have a cover page clearly stating: the name of the importer, order number, date of order, and type of order. The application for foreign drug import must be written in Vietnamese or English. If the application is written in English, the information in the package insert must be written in Vietnamese, except for the following information that may be written in other languages with Latin origin:

Brand name, generic name, or international generic name of the drug
International generic or scientific name of ingredient or ingredient quantity of the drug in case it cannot be translated into Vietnamese
Name and address of the foreign enterprise that manufactures or franchises the drug
The MOH’s DAV will review and approve the import permit application within 15 working days from the date of receipt. According to VNM-12, however, the DAV review and approval process may take two (2) to eight (8) weeks if the DAV requires further clarification on the application. See the ExprtImprtMeds for applicable forms.

Please note: Vietnam is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (VNM-2), which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see VNM-6.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Investigator's Brochure

According to the BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP), the Investigator’s Brochure (IB) is considered an essential document to submit before a clinical trial may be conducted. Vietnam requires the sponsor to submit a summary of the IB to the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT) in the clinical trial registration dossier. Research institutions are required to submit the full IB to the ASTT in the study approval dossier. (Note: The ClinDrugTrialGCP and the BioequivTrial also refer to the sponsor as “organizations and individuals with clinical trial drugs” or “donor”.)

As per the ClinDrugTrialGCP and the BioequivTrial, the IB contains information and data about preclinical research and clinical trials on the investigational product(s) (IPs). The IB also demonstrates that clinical information related to the IP has been provided to the principal investigator (PI).

As specified in the ClinDrugTrialGCP, the IB must provide coverage of the following areas:

Information about the IP, including the ingredients, production processes, and quality standards
For pharmaco-chemical drugs, pharmaceutical drugs, traditional medicines: proof of compliance with Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) for research institutions or proof of compliance with Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) for drug manufacturers
For vaccines: proof of compliance with quality testing requirements from national inspection agencies or ex-warehousing certificates for vaccine or biological batches
Preclinical research documents for the IP: research reports on pharmacological effects, toxicity, safety, recommendations on dosage, route of administration, and usage
Clinical research papers from the previous phases (if clinical trials are recommended in the next phase and the IP is not subject to exemption from previous phases)
Quality Management

The ClinDrugTrialGCP specifies that the IPs must be manufactured in a GMP-certified facility. The research institutions must also include a copy of the GMP certificate in the study approval dossier that is submitted to the ASTT.

(See the Product Management section for additional information on IP supply, storage, and handling requirements).

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Vietnam must comply with the requirements set forth in PharmLaw-VNM. Per VNM-12, the requirements in Articles 7 and 8 of the MedLabel should also be applied to IP labeling.

According to the MedLabel, the outer packaging label of the drug must show the following:

Drug name
Dosage form
Ingredients, content, and volume or concentration of pharmaceutical ingredients and medicinal materials in the drug formula
Packaging specifications
Indications, usage, and contraindications of the drug
Circulation registration number or import license number (if any)
Production batch number, date of manufacture, expiry date of the drug, quality standards, and drug storage conditions
Signs to note and recommendations when using the drug
Name and address of the drug manufacturing facility
Name and address of the import facility (for imported drugs)
Origin of the drug
Additionally, as stated in the MedLabel, the intermediate packaging label of the drug must contain at least the following information:

Drug name
Production batch number
Expiry date
As set forth in PharmLaw-VNM, the IP must also be clearly labeled with the wording: “Products used for clinical trials. Use for other purposes is prohibited.” According to VNM-12, this wording should be in Vietnamese. A sample IP with the label in the smallest packed unit must also be included in the study approval dossier.

(See the Product Management section for additional information on IP supply, storage, and handling requirements).

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

The BioequivTrial (which amends Appendix I of the ClinDrugTrialGCP) indicates that at the end of a clinical trial, the principal investigator (PI) must inventory the investigational product (IP). The sponsor is responsible for storing the IP and for working with the host institution to withdraw and destroy the unused or remaining products, in accordance with applicable regulations.

Record Requirements

As stated in the BioequivTrial, the sponsor and the PI are responsible for filing the following essential documents before the trial begins and during the conduct of the trial:

Sample(s) labels attached to IP container(s) (only the sponsor is required to file this information)
Instructions for handling IPs and trial-related materials (if not included in protocol or Investigator’s Brochure (IB))
Shipping records for IP- and trial-related materials
In addition, the sponsor and the PI are responsible for maintaining records of handling instructions and shipping records for IPs and trial-related materials.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
In Vietnam, as per Decree89 and the MgmtInfctSpcmn, specimens are defined as human blood, serum, plasma, urine, feces, human body fluids, and other specimens that contain infectious substances and microorganisms pathogenic to humans. In addition, as per the MgmtInfctSpcmn, infectious substances are those that are known or expected to contain pathogens affecting humans, and are classified as Category A and B. Category A specimens are those capable of causing life-threatening diseases, death, or permanent disability to humans when they are exposed (see Appendix I of the MgmtInfctSpcmn). Category B specimens are those not listed in Category A. Specimens are also referred to as “medical microbiological samples” in Decree89.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
Import

As set forth in the MgmtInfctSpcmn, the Ministry of Health (MOH)’s General Department of Preventive Medicine (DPM) is responsible for regulating the transportation of infectious specimens.

According to Decree89, samples of medical microorganisms, biological products, tissues, and organs transported across the Vietnamese border must be medically declared (See Form No. 13 in the Decree89).

VNM-12 further states that an import license from the DPM is required only if the specimens are infectious. Decree155Amend requires that application dossiers for the import of infectious specimens include:

A written request for the grant of an import license
A copy of the competent agency’s approval permitting the implementation of a valid research project, a copy of the approved project proposal or project document, or a copy of the valid written agreement between domestic and foreign establishments regarding the import of specimens
A declaration regarding compliance with applicable biosafety standards
As delineated in Decree155Amend, establishments applying for import permits must submit their dossiers directly or by post to the MOH. If there is no request to amend or supplement the dossier, the MOH must grant the import license within 15 days from the date of receipt of the application. See Decree155Amend for additional information on import licensing procedures.

Export

Per VNM-12, no license is required for the export of specimens.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: September 15, 2025
No information is currently available.

Requirements
(Legislation) Law No. 105/2016/QH13 on Pharmacy (PharmLaw-VNM – Vietnamese) (English-PharmLaw-VNM - Unofficial translation) (Effective January 1, 2017)
The National Assembly
(Legislation) Law No. 25/2004/QH11 on Child Protection, Care, and Education (ChildLaw – Vietnamese) (Effective January 1, 2005)
The National Assembly
(Legislation) Law No. 60/2024/QH15 on Data (DataLaw-VNM – Vietnamese) (Effective July 1, 2025)
The National Assembly
(Regulation) Circular No. 01/2018/TT-BYT – Regulations on Labeling of Medicines, Medicinal Ingredients and Drug Use Instructions (MedLabel – Vietnamese) (Effective June 1, 2018)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Circular No. 07/2022/TT-BYT – Regulations on Drugs Subject to Bioequivalence Testing and Requirements for Bioequivalence Research Data Reporting Documents (BioTestReq – Vietnamese) (Effective November 1, 2022)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Circular No. 08/2014/TT-BYT - Regulations on Clinical Trial Research Support Activities in Vietnam (ClinTrialSup – Vietnamese) (Effective May 1, 2014)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Circular No. 10/2020/TT-BYT – Regulations on Bioequivalence Testing of Drugs (BioequivTrial – Vietnamese) (Effective August 10, 2020)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Circular No. 12/2025/TT-BYT – Regulations on Registration of Drugs and Medicinal Ingredients (DrugRgstrtn – Vietnamese) (Effective July 1, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Circular No. 21/2018/TT-BYT – Regulations on the Registration of Traditional Medicines and Medicinal Herbs (TradMedicine – Vietnamese) (Effective October 28, 2018)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Circular No. 29/2018/TT-BYT – Regulations for Clinical Trials on Drugs (ClinDrugTrialGCP – Vietnamese) (Effective January 1, 2019)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Circular No. 40/2018/TT-BYT – Regulations on the Management of Infectious Disease Specimens (MgmtInfctSpcmn – Vietnamese) (Effective January 25, 2019)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Circular No. 43/2024/TT-BYT – Regulations on the Establishment, Organization, and Operation of the Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (ECReg – Vietnamese) (Effective February 1, 2025)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Decision No. 111/QD-BYT – On the Promulgation of Regulations on the Organization and Operation of Council of Ethics in Biomedical Research at the Grass-Roots Level (CEBRGLReg – Vietnamese) (January 11, 2013)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Decision No. 4059/QD-BYT – Regulations on the Functions, Tasks, Powers and Organizational Structure Under the Administration of Science, Technology and Training of the Ministry of Health (ASTTReg – Vietnamese) (Effective October 20, 2012)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Decree No. 13/2023/ND-CP – Protection of Personal Data (Decree13 - Vietnamese) (English-Decree13 - Google Translation) (Effective July 1, 2023)
Socialist Republic of Vietnam
(Regulation) Decree No. 155/2018/ND-CP – Amending and Supplementing a Number of Regulations Related to Investment and Business Conditions under the Scope of State Management of the Ministry of Health (Decree155Amend – Vietnamese) (Effective November 12, 2018)
Socialist Republic of Vietnam
(Regulation) Decree No. 45/2025/ND-CP – Regulations on the Functions, Tasks, Powers and Organizational Structure of the Ministry of Health (DecreeMOH – Vietnamese) (Effective March 1, 2025)
Socialist Republic of Vietnam
(Regulation) Decree No. 54/2017/ND-CP – Detailed Regulations on a Number of Articles and Measures for Implementing the Pharmacy Law (Decree54 – Vietnamese) (Effective July 1, 2017)
Ministry of Health
(Regulation) Decree No. 89/2018/ND-CP – Detailed Regulations on the Implementation of Some Articles of the Law on Infectious Disease Prevention and Control Regarding Border Medical Quarantine (Decree89 - Vietnamese) (Effective August 10, 2018)
Socialist Republic of Vietnam
(Regulation) Plan for Appraisal of Initial Assessment Records and Assessment of Maintenance of Compliance with Good Clinical Practice in 2024 (ASTT-GCPAssess – Vietnamese) (Effective September 24, 2024)
Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Circular No. 03/2012/TT-BYT – Guidelines for Clinical Trials on Drugs (ClinDrugTrial – Vietnamese) (Effective March 20, 2012)
Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Circular No. 47/2010/TT-BYT – Guidelines for Export and Import of Drugs and Packaging in Direct Contact with Drugs (ExprtImprtMeds – Vietnamese) (December 29, 2010)
Ministry of Health
(Guidance) Decision No. 62/QD-K2DT on the Promulgation of "Guidelines on Recording, Handling, and Reporting Adverse Event and Serious Adverse Events in Clinical Trials Conducted in Vietnam" (AERprtingD62 - Vietnamese) (June 2, 2017)
Ministry of Health
Additional Resources
(Document) Implementing Clinical Research In Vietnam: A Dialogue on the Current Regulations of the Ministry of Health (VNM-4) (July 12-13, 2007)
Family Health International and Vietnam Ministry of Health
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (VNM-2) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (VNM-5) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) The Use of Essential Drugs: Sixth Report of the WHO Expert Committee (VNM-10) (Technical Report Series No. 850) (1995)
World Health Organization
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with VietStar Biomedical Research (May 2024) (VNM-12)
(Webpage) Administration of Science, Technology and Training (ASTT) - Contact (VNM-11 - Vietnamese) (Current as of September 4, 2025)
Administration of Science, Technology and Training, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) ClinicalTrials.gov (VNM-13) (Current as of September 4, 2025)
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health & Human Services
(Webpage) Country Profile: Vietnam (VNM-6) (Current as of September 4, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) List of Forms of the Ethics Council (VNM-3 - Vietnamese) (Last Updated June 23, 2023)
Administration of Science, Technology and Training, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) National Information Portal on Personal Data Protection – Notice of Violation of Personal Data Protection Regulations (VNM-9 - Vietnamese) (Current as of September 4, 2025)
Administration of Science, Technology and Training, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) National Information Portal on Personal Data Protection – State Management Agency (VNM-8 - Vietnamese) (Current as of September 4, 2025)
Administration of Science, Technology and Training, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) National Information Portal on Personal Data Protection (VNM-7 - Vietnamese) (Current as of September 4, 2025)
Administration of Science, Technology and Training, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Organizational Structure of the National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research for the Term 2023-2028 (VNM-1 - Vietnamese) (Last Updated June 22, 2023)
Administration of Science, Technology and Training, Ministry of Health
(Webpage) Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) of the National Ethics Committee in Biomedical Research (VNM-14 - Vietnamese) (Last Updated December 2, 2019)
Administration of Science, Technology and Training, Ministry of Health
Forms
No Forms available.
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

Skip to main content
Home


Menu
»

Zimbabwe
News
Quick Facts
Research & Sites
Profile Updates
Helpful Links
Clinical trial application language
Unspecified
Regulatory authority & ethics committee review may be conducted at the same time
Yes
Clinical trial registration required
Yes
In-country sponsor presence/representation required
No
Age of minors
Under 18
Specimens export allowed
Yes
Regulatory Authority
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Clinical research in Zimbabwe is regulated and overseen by the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ), the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ), and the National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA).

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the MSCAct and the MSC-Regs, the MCAZ is a statutory body that has authority for regulating and authorizing clinical trials in Zimbabwe. Further, the MSCAct authorizes MCAZ’s functions related to registering medicines, providing a national laboratory, and appointing a Director-General. The Minister of Zimbabwe’s Ministry of Health and Child Care (MOHCC) appoints MCAZ members. ZWE-3 indicates that the MCAZ is responsible for protecting public health by ensuring that medicines, allied substances, and medical devices are safe, effective, and of good quality by manufacturers and distributors.

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ZWE-GCP, all clinical trials of medicines in Zimbabwe involving human participants must not be initiated until the MCAZ has authorized the conduct of the trial, with the approval of the Secretary for Health and Child Care at the MOHCC, in accordance with the MSCAct, the MSC-Regs, and the MSC-ImportExport. ZWE-4 indicates that the Clinical Trial Unit of MCAZ’s Pharmacovigilance and Clinical Trials (PVCT) Division has regulatory oversight function for clinical trials conducted in Zimbabwe. The Clinical Trial Unit receives, processes, and evaluates applications for approval to conduct studies within Zimbabwe, as well as amendments during the conduct of a study. The CT-AppAuth further indicates that the MCAZ is responsible for authorizing the importation, exportation, and destruction of investigational products (IPs). Per ZWE-68 and the ZWE-GCP, MCAZ’s Licensing and Enforcement Division (LED) issues licenses to pharmacies, manufacturers, and dispensaries involved with IPs. See ZWE-68 for more details on LED operations and additional responsibilities of the LED’s three (3) units: the Licensing Unit, the Enforcement Unit, and the Import/Export Unit. Also see ZWE-2 for an overview of MCAZ’s licensing functions. See ZWE-14 for MCAZ’s clinical trials oversight including guidelines, application forms, and public assessment reports.

Research Council of Zimbabwe

As set forth in the ResearchAct, the RCZ was established as a corporate body to promote, direct, supervise, and coordinate research in the country. In addition, the RCZ is charged with registering foreign researchers and handling matters connected with or incidental to foreign researchers. According to CTEthics, the RCZ is under Zimbabwe’s Ministry of Higher and Tertiary Education, Innovation, Science and Technology Development. Per ZWE-13, the RCZ provides a forum for interaction and discussion among government, academia, and industry. It is also a conduit for financial and infrastructure support for collaborative research among research institutes and councils. To achieve its mission and vision, the RCZ:

Directs relevant quality research and creates knowledge-sharing platforms aimed at addressing national development priorities
Develops and nurtures a research culture for evidence-based decision making
Ensures ethical, safe, and valid research practices
National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

Established through the BioTechAct, ZWE-67 indicates that the NBA was established to promote, regulate, and coordinate the safe and sustainable research, development, and application of biotechnology in agriculture, medicine, energy, and the environment. According to CTEthics, the NBA is under Zimbabwe’s Ministry of Higher and Tertiary Education, Innovation, Science and Technology Development. Per the BioTechAct, the NBA has the following functions that are relevant to clinical trials:

Develop long-term policy for safety in biotechnology in Zimbabwe
Promote biotechnology research, development, and application in Zimbabwe
Review biotechnology/vaccine clinical trials and decide whether to approve, prohibit, or restrict such trials
Review reports and monitor all ongoing approved clinical trials involving high-risk category organisms
Approve the safety aspects of the import, export, manufacture, processing, and selling of any biotechnology products
Advise the customs authorities on the import and export of biologically active material and biotechnology products
Establish contact and maintain a liaison with other countries and international organizations concerned with monitoring or researching biotechnology
The CTEthics reaffirms that the NBA is empowered to approve vaccine clinical trials, as well as oversee biosafety committees and inspect laboratories that store biological agents.

Note that per the BioTechAct, in the NBA’s relation to the RCZ, the RCZ maintains the overall responsibility for the promotion, direction, supervision, and coordination of research in Zimbabwe. The NBA reports to RCZ, as requested, regarding biotechnology research, development, and applications.

Please note: Zimbabwe is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (ZWE-91) which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see ZWE-92.

Contact Information

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

ZWE-66 provides the following MCAZ contact information:

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
106 Baines Avenue
Harare, Zimbabwe
Phone: +263-4-736981/5; 708255; 792165; 0772 145 191/2/3
WhatsApp Number: +263 718 855 934
Toll Free Numbers: Econet – 08080641; TelOne – 08004507

Main Email: mcaz@mcaz.co.zw
Customer Service Email: customerservice@mcaz.co.zw
PVCT Email: pvct@mcaz.co.zw
Imports and Exports Email: imports@mcaz.co.zw
Licensing Email: licensingunit@mcaz.co.zw

Research Council of Zimbabwe

ZWE-13 provides the following RCZ contact information for the main office:

Research Council of Zimbabwe
11 Stafford Road
Mount Pleasant
Harare, Zimbabwe
Phone: +(263) 242 304787/733/861
Email: secretary@rcz.ac.zw

ProcForeignReg provides the following contact information for registration of foreign researchers:

The Executive Director
Research Council of Zimbabwe
Box CY 294
Causeway, Zimbabwe
Phone: +(263) 242-304733, 304787, and 304861
Mobile: +(263) 712954332, +263712954330
Email: technical@rcz.ac.zw

National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

ZWE-16 provides the following NBA contact information:

National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe
21 Princess Drive Newlands
Harare, Zimbabwe
Phone: +(263) 242-782155 /167/856/159 and +(263) 8677 198 735
Email: nba@nba.ac.zw

Scope of Assessment
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

As set forth in the MSCAct, the MSC-Regs, the CT-AppAuth, and ZWE-4, the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) is responsible for regulating and authorizing clinical trials of registered and unregistered investigational products (IPs) in human participants in Zimbabwe. The National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA) and the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ) also have important regulatory roles, as explained in detail below. Per ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, parallel submissions are encouraged to the regulatory authorities and to the national ethics committee (EC)—the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ). However, as indicated in ProcForeignReg, approval by the MRCZ is a prerequisite for RCZ’s consideration of a research permit application by a foreign researcher.

Clinical Trial Review Process

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

ZWE-4 indicates that the Clinical Trial Unit of MCAZ’s Pharmacovigilance and Clinical Trials Division (PVCT) provides regulatory oversight for clinical trials conducted in Zimbabwe. The Clinical Trial Unit receives, processes, and evaluates applications for approval to conduct studies within Zimbabwe, as well as amendments during the conduct of a study. The Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-1) will allocate an in-house reference number and send a letter of acknowledgement of receipt of clinical trial application (CTA) to the principal investigator (PI).

As set forth in the CT-AppAuth, the CTA will be reviewed by external and internal experts appointed by the MCAZ. The initial review may produce questions that need to be addressed by the applicant. Communication with the applicant should be directed through the MCAZ Director General and not through the reviewers. The reviewers will generate an evaluation or assessment report that will be considered by the MCAZ. Applicants will only be allowed three (3) chances to address the raised queries. If the applicant fails to address all outstanding issues within the timeline stipulated in the MCAZ feedback letter, the application will be considered as abandoned and may be rejected. In this case, a new clinical trial application will be required if the applicant wishes to pursue the clinical trial. Next, the MCAZ will make a recommendation for approval or rejection of the application to the Secretary for Health and Child Care, in accordance with the MSCAct. As set forth in the CT-AppAuth, the MCAZ may recommend approval or rejection of the application to the Secretary for Health and Child Care with written reasons for rejection. In the case of rejection, the applicant may appeal in line with the MSCAct. If an application is approved, the MCAZ will issue a clinical trial authorization for the trial with conditions of authorization, including the validity period of the trial. The clinical trial authorization will be valid up to the proposed duration of the study as indicated in the CTA and the authorization form, or for a period deemed necessary by MCAZ, but must not be for more than five (5) years. For a trial proposed to be conducted for more than five (5) years, the applicant must request an extension. MCAZ will issue an updated authorization if the application is found to be satisfactory upon review. If MCAZ raises additional questions, the applicant will have 30 days to respond and then the MCAZ will make its decision. See CT-AppAuth, ZWE-65, and ZWE-4 for flow charts of the CTA submittal and review processes at MCAZ. Per ZWE-GCP, applications for clinical trial renewals should be submitted to MCAZ for approval if the PI wishes to extend the clinical trial beyond the expiration date of the clinical trial stated in the MCAZ authorization. Applications for renewals should be submitted three (3) months before the expiration date and must be processed within 60 calendar days.

As delineated in the CT-AppAuth, clinical trial amendments must be submitted to the MCAZ for review and approval using the appropriate form (ZWE-84 for protocol amendments; ZWE-32 for investigators/sites), and with the applicable fees. Urgent amendments deemed crucial to protect participants or the community may be implemented immediately, but the EC and MCAZ must be notified within 48 hours, followed by a full submission. Amendments affecting participant safety (e.g., dose, regimen, monitoring) require written MCAZ approval before implementation; other changes may be implemented only after MCAZ approval. The PVCT Committee considers each amendment and communicates approval, rejection, or requests for additional information in writing, with a 30-working-day review timeline once documentation is complete. Early submission (at least two (2) weeks before the next PVCT meeting) may shorten the review time. Changes made during an ongoing authorization assessment are not considered amendments. Minor amendments are those not affecting safety, design, or results; major amendments are those that do. Certain changes—such as a new study product, new arms, or major study design/objective changes—require a new clinical trial application. See the CT-AppAuth for additional details.

Per CT-AppAuth, the MCAZ implements an expedited review pathway for certain clinical trial applications. This pathway can be used in the case of public health emergencies or at the request of a PI. If Zimbabwe has been declared to be in a public health emergency disaster by the President or Minister of Health, the World Health Organization (WHO), or any other designated person, an expedited regulatory review pathway for clinical trials will be implemented in line with ZWE-75. The timeline for MCAZ review is 15-30 working days subject to submission of a complete application package. The fees for the expedited review pathway will be as stipulated by the MCAZ. Without unnecessarily compromising patient safety, the shortest realistic timelines will be made a priority. The emergency procedure will involve joint review/inspections, data sharing, and MCAZ communication with the MRCZ to speed up approval of the clinical trial.

CT-AppAuth and ZWE-GCP state that MCAZ will conduct good clinical practice (GCP) inspections either before trial commencement, and/or during clinical trial conduct and/or after completion of the trial in line with the MSCAct mandate to monitor clinical trials from start to finish. Using a risk-based approach, inspections may be routine or may be triggered by issues arising during the assessment of the protocol, annual reports, amendments, or protocol deviations or by other information such as previous inspection experience. The MCAZ’s inspections are meant to ensure compliance with GCP and may be done with or without notification. Combined inspections may be conducted with the MCAZ or the MRCZ. Aspects of the study that will be inspected may include, but are not limited to, the facilities and staff where the studies will be conducted, as approved by the MCAZ; compliance with the approved protocol and any amendment(s) to the protocol; accurate, complete, and current records according to the protocol; and serious adverse event(s) and adverse event(s) reporting according to MCAZ requirements.

Reliance Model and Joint Assessment

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ReliancePlcy, the MCAZ employs a “reliance model” for clinical trial IPs, which means it may take into account and gives significant weight to—either totally or partially rely upon—evaluations performed by another country’s regulatory authority or a trusted institution in reaching its own decision. The approach facilitates conducting regulatory reviews and evaluations in a timely manner and at the same time, accelerates the evaluation process without compromising the quality, safety, and efficacy of IPs, as well as the design of clinical trials. The MCAZ, however, remains responsible and accountable for decisions taken, even when it relies on the decisions and information of others. As indicated in the G-Reliance, MCAZ applies reliance through defined review pathways to reduce evaluation times including abridged review, verification review, mutual recognition, unilateral recognition, World Health Organization (WHO) prequalification for medicines or vaccines, Emergency Use Listing during public health emergencies, agreements or memoranda of understanding, or continental listing of human medicinal products under the African Medicines Regulatory Harmonization Initiative.

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ReliancePlcy, the MCAZ uses the reliance model approach for clinical trial design and/or IPs especially when (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The safety and efficacy of the IP have already been confirmed through WHO prequalification
The IP has been approved in Stringent Regulatory Authorities, which are WHO-listed countries and any other countries considered trustworthy and using publicly accessible clinical trial registries
The clinical trial design and/or IP has been evaluated and found satisfactory at a joint review meeting facilitated by the WHO or the African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF)
The ReliancePlcy indicates that to use the reliance approach for clinical trials, the MCAZ needs proof of approval of the clinical trial design and/or IP by the reference National Regulatory Authority (NRA). The G-Reliance indicates that NRAs may include countries on the list of WHO listed authorities. Further, the reliance approach is not applicable to local requirements, such as ethics approvals, informed consent forms, pharmacy plans, participants’ insurance, etc. See the G-Reliance and the ReliancePlcy for additional details.

The G-Reliance also enables joint assessment and work-sharing between two (2) or more regulatory authorities from regional regulatory networks. MCAZ is part of the Southern African Development Community (ZAZIBONA) joint assessment. The authorities jointly assess the same application and benefit from shared evaluation reports. Each country still makes its own final decision.

Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per the ResearchAct, the RCZ promotes, directs, supervises, and coordinates research in the country; registers foreign researchers, and handles matters connected with or incidental to foreign researchers, including, as specified in the CTEthics, issuing permits for shipment of specimens. Per the CT-AppAuth and ProcForeignReg, foreign researchers must apply for a research permit with RCZ; they must also obtain RCZ approval to export biospecimens and/or materials. (See the Specimen Import & Export section for more information on export of specimens.) Approval by the MRCZ is a prerequisite for RCZ consideration of a research permit application by a foreign researcher. If approved, a Registration Certificate is issued to the institute of affiliation for onward transmission to the foreign researcher. Research permits are issued for a continuous period of one (1) year. After the expiration date, the research may continue upon renewal of the research permit. See ProcForeignReg and ZWE-17 for details on the renewal submission process and ZWE-60 for the renewal application form. In addition, see G-RegForeignStud for guidelines for foreign students to conduct research in Zimbabwe.

In addition, as indicated in ZWE-10, RCZ offers an expedited process for fast-track review of clinical trial submissions. Expedited review does not guarantee approval. If major issues arise during review of the application, the timelines may be extended. To qualify for an expedited review, the application must include:

A letter directed to the Executive Director of RCZ stating the reasons for expediting
Proof of payment of RCZ fees
National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the BioTechAct, the NBA’s responsibilities include reviewing, approving, and monitoring biotechnology/vaccine clinical trials, as well as approving and monitoring the safety aspects of the import, export, manufacture, processing, and selling of any biotechnology products. As set forth in the ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, the NBA is responsible for clearance of recombinant DNA products and issues Trial Release Permits and Facility Registration for clinical trials involving biological products. For clinical trials involving biological products, the MCAZ requires NBA approval or proof of application to the NBA.

See the Clinical Trial Lifecycle topic for more details on the clinical trial submission and review process for these three (3) regulatory agencies.

Regulatory Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the MSCAct, the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) is authorized to make regulations to collect fees for its various medicine regulatory functions. As delineated in the MSC-Regs and the CT-AppAuth, applicants are responsible for paying various fees to submit an application to conduct a clinical trial of registered and unregistered human medicines.

The CT-Fees prescribes the following fees for an application to conduct a clinical trial funded by a local sponsor:

Human medicine: $2,000 USD
Sub-study: $1,000 USD
Operational research study: $1,000 USD
Observational study: $200 USD
Any other case: $100 USD
Initial or subsequent amendments to original application funded by a local sponsor: $50 USD
Expedited review: the regular fees outlined above plus 50% of the process-specific fee
For an application to conduct a clinical trial funded by a foreign sponsor, the CT-Fees prescribes the following fees:

Human medicine in a phase I study: $5,000 USD
Human medicine in a phase II study: $4,000 USD
Human medicine in a phase III or IV study: $3,000 USD
Operational: $1,000 USD
Bioavailability/bioequivalence: $500
Observational: $200 USD
Any other case: $200 USD
Initial or subsequent amendments to original application funded by a foreign sponsor: $100 USD
Expedited review: the regular fees outlined above plus 50% of the process-specific fee
Per ZWE-GCP, a MCAZ license is required for a pharmacy involved with a clinical trial. Per CT-Fees, the license application fees for premises other than a pharmaceutical manufacturer’s premises are as follows:

Pharmacy in the Central Business District of a city: $1,900 USD
Pharmacy in any other urban location: $1,000 USD
Pharmacy under a rural district council: $600 USD
Dispensing medical practitioner: $500 USD
Industrial clinic: $250 USD
Dispensary at a local authority clinic: $50 USD
Dispensary at a public health institution: $50 USD
Any other clinic: $150 USD
Per CT-Fees, the license application fees for a pharmaceutical manufacturer’s premises are as follows:

Sterile pharmaceutical manufacturing unit: $6,000 USD
Pharmaceutical manufacturer’s premises with more than three (3) dosage forms and not including sterile product manufacturing facilities: $5,000 USD
Pharmaceutical manufacturer’s premises with up to three (3) dosage forms: $4,500 USD
Restricted pharmaceutical manufacturing premises: $3,500 USD
Per CT-Fees, the application fees to export or import an unregistered medicine is as follows:

Locally sponsored clinical trial: $10 USD (per medicine)
Foreign sponsored clinical trial: $20 USD (per medicine)
Per CT-Fees, the inspection of premises fees are as follows:

Pharmaceutical manufacturer’s premises: $1,000 USD
Other premises: $200 USD
Expedited inspections for other premises: $400 USD plus the cost of the re-inspection
All of the above fees are subject to a 15% value added tax pursuant to the VATTax. See CT-Fees for additional information on MCAZ’s fee schedule, including various renewal fees.

Payment Instructions

Per ZWE-6, payments from within Zimbabwe can be made by cash deposits or direct transfer via the bank details obtained from the MCAZ accounts office. All payments from external sources should be transferred per the bank details indicated on the proforma invoice issued by the MCAZ. Applicants should cover any shortfalls caused by a commission charged by banks during a transfer. Customers are encouraged to always send scanned or physical copies after every deposit into the MCAZ account with full details of payment (e.g., registration fees). For questions, contact the MCAZ at mcaz@mcaz.co.zw.

As per ZWE-6, Zimbabwe also uses EcoCash—a mobile payment tool that enables customers to complete financial transactions directly from their mobile phone. The following are the steps for paying fees via EcoCash:

Dial *151#
Enter the pin number
Select “Make Payment”
Select “Pay Bill”
Enter MCAZ Biller Code “03769”
Enter amount to be paid to MCAZ
Enter account number “0775 648 276”
Provide EcoCash confirmation code and the reason for payment through the following platforms: Email – mcaz@mcaz.co.zw; application forms (visibly indicate the code on the forms); and mobile number 0772 609 540
Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per the ResearchAct and ProcForeignReg, foreign sponsors and researchers are required to register with the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ). RegFeesForeign prescribes the following fees:

Normal registration fee: $500 USD
Penalty for late renewal of registration: $500 per month USD and part thereof
Application for extension of the study: $500 USD
Amendment fee: $500 USD
Shipment of biospecimens (Zimbabwean students): $150 USD
Expedited review: $1,000 USD (plus the normal registration fee of $500)
Payment Instructions

Per RegFeesForeign, the RCZ registration fee for foreign researchers must be by either international money transfer or U.S. dollar cash deposit into the RCZ Foreign Currency Bank Account:

Bank: Commercial Bank of Zimbabwe
Account Name: Research Council of Zimbabwe
Branch: Kwame Nkrumah
Currency Account: USD
Account Number: 011 200 1674 0067
Swift Code: COBZZWHAXXX
Branch Sort Code: 6119

National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

No information is currently available regarding National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA) fees.

Ethics Committee
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

Per the ZWE-GCP, the CTEthics, and ZWE-41, all research involving human participants in Zimbabwe must be reviewed by an institutional ethics committee (EC). Further, according to ZWE-9, all health research conducted in Zimbabwe by any individual or institution is also required to receive approval from the national EC, the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) through its technical National Health Research Development Committee (NHRDC). NHRDC, a technical subcommittee of the MRCZ, was established to provide oversight on all health research conducted in Zimbabwe. Per ZWE-41, MRCZ will only accept for review and approval those research proposals that have been previously approved by an institutional EC.

Per the ResearchAct, CTEthics, ZWE-7, and ZWE-8, MRCZ’s responsibilities include serving as the national EC to provide health researchers and institutions with independent ethical advice and clearance on research. The MRCZ is established and supported by the Ministry of Health and Child Care (MOHCC). ZWE-7 also indicates that the MRCZ is a specialized council of the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ) established under the ResearchAct.

Ethics Committee Composition

Institutional Ethics Committees

As delineated in the CTEthics, institutional ECs should consist of members who, collectively, have the qualifications and experience to review and evaluate the science, health aspects, and ethics of the proposed research. In addition, they should be independent, multi-disciplinary, multi-sectoral, and pluralistic. Specifically, the EC must:

Be representative of the communities it serves and, increasingly, reflect the demographic profile of the population of Zimbabwe
Include members of both genders, although not more than 70% should be either male or female
Have at least nine (9) members, with 60% constituting a quorum
Have a chairperson
Include at least two (2) lay persons who have no affiliation with the institution, are not currently involved in medical or scientific research, and are preferably from the community in which the research is to take place
Include at least one (1) member with knowledge of, and current experience in, areas of research that are likely to be regularly considered by the EC
Include at least one (1) member with knowledge of, and current experience in, the professional care, counseling, or treatment of people (e.g., medical practitioner, psychologist, social worker, or nurse)
Include at least one (1) member who has professional training in both qualitative and quantitative research methodologies
Include at least one (1) member who is legally trained
The institution or organization must ensure that the membership is equipped to address all relevant considerations arising from the likely categories of research. The EC must ensure that it is adequately informed on all aspects of a research protocol, including its scientific and statistical validity, which are relevant to deciding whether the protocol is acceptable on ethical grounds and conforms to the principles of the CTEthics.
ZWE-GCP also sets out guidance on EC composition and states that an EC should consist of at least three (3) professionals in the medical and scientific field with sufficient qualifications and experience; a legal professional; and a religious or consumer representative who is independent of the institution/trial site.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

As described in the CTEthics, the MRCZ is composed of scientists, medical experts, ethicists, patient representatives, and community representatives. It is independent in its reflection, advice, and decisions. Per ZWE-9, the NHRDC is required to approve/disapprove and oversee all health research conducted in Zimbabwe. Members are expected to have interest, knowledge, and experience related to the conduct of health research. As described in the CTEthics, MRCZ’s NHRDC provides health researchers and institutions with independent ethical advice and clearance. The MRCZ’s responsibilities include:

Providing guidance, advice, and approval/disapproval decisions of research protocols intended to be conducted in Zimbabwe by all researchers and health institutions
Providing ethical guidance and advice on research programs undertaken within Zimbabwe
Providing ethical guidance and advice on specific ethical issues presented to it by the institutional ECs and any other interested parties
Developing and/or reviewing, as requested, ethical guidelines for Zimbabwe
Terms of Reference, Review Procedures, and Meeting Schedule

Institutional Ethics Committees

As indicated in the CTEthics, when establishing an EC, terms of reference must be set out by the institution and include the scope of its responsibilities, relationship to non-affiliated researchers, accountability, mechanisms for reporting, and remuneration, if any, for members. The institution must determine procedures for recruitment and appointment to the EC. ECs must establish and document operating procedures on the following:

EC meetings, including frequency, preparation of agenda and minutes, distribution of papers prior to meetings, and presentation of research protocols; note the regulations delineate that 60% constitutes a quorum for EC meetings
Presentation of all documents and other materials used to inform potential research participants
Quorum and methods of decision-making
Requirements for submission of research projects for ethical approval
Registration of applications
Timely review and written notification of decisions to researchers
Documentation of decisions and associated reasons, including a meaningful engagement on the ethical issues
Confidentiality of the content of the protocols and of a committee’s proceedings
Reporting of adverse events
Reporting of amendments to protocols
Access to documents and regular monitoring
Complaints procedures
Procedures for easy and adequate access to EC members
Fees charged
End-of-trials review
Per ZWE-GCP, the EC should give its opinion and advice in writing, clearly identifying the trial, the documents reviewed, and the dates of review.

ZWE-GCP states that only those members who are independent of the investigator/sponsor of the trial should make decisions.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

ZWE-11 indicates that MRCZ has monthly meetings to review research proposals. When five (5) copies of a new research proposal are submitted for review to the MRCZ, one (1) copy becomes the MRCZ copy, and the other four (4) copies are sent to external reviewers depending on their area of specialty and the title of the proposal. The external reviewers will send comments back to the MRCZ for consideration at its monthly review meetings.

Scope of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

Per the CTEthics and the ZWE-GCP, the primary scope of information assessed by institutional ethics committees (ECs) and the national EC—Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ)—relates to maintaining and protecting the rights and dignity of research participants and ensuring their safety and wellbeing throughout their participation in a clinical trial. ECs should be especially vigilant when considering research proposals involving vulnerable populations and for invasive research that has no direct benefit for its participants. (See the Vulnerable Populations; Children/Minors; Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates; Prisoners; and Mentally Impaired sections for additional information about these populations.) The ZWE-GCP states that the MRCZ must ensure that participants are protected in accordance with international standards and guidelines. The CTEthics identifies relevant international standards and guidelines in Appendix B.

Role in Clinical Trial Approval Process

Per the ZWE-GCP, the CTEthics, and ZWE-41, all research involving human participants in Zimbabwe must be reviewed by an institutional EC. Further, according to ZWE-9, all health research conducted in Zimbabwe by any individual or institution is also required to receive approval of the national EC, the MRCZ, through its technical National Health Research Development Committee (NHRDC). Per ZWE-41, MRCZ will only accept for review and approval those research proposals that have been previously approved by an institutional EC. Per ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, parallel submissions are encouraged to the regulatory authorities (the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ), the National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA), and the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ)) and to the MRCZ. However as indicated in ProcForeignReg, approval by the MRCZ is a prerequisite for the RCZ’s consideration of a research permit application by a foreign researcher.

As indicated in the CTEthics, if an EC finds reason to believe that continuance of a research project will compromise participants’ welfare, it should immediately seek to establish whether ethical approval for the project should be withdrawn. This process should ensure that researchers and others involved in the project are treated fairly and with respect. Where ethical approval for a research project is withdrawn, the researcher, the institution(s), and, where possible, the participants, should be informed of the withdrawal. The institution must ensure that the researcher promptly suspends the research and arranges to meet the needs of participants. The research may not be resumed unless either the EC establishes that continuance will not compromise participants’ welfare, or the research is modified and approved by the EC.

Institutional Ethics Committees

As laid out in the CTEthics, the institutional EC’s functions are as follows:

Review research proposals and protocols to ensure that research will be conducted to promote health, and to prevent or cure disability and disease
Ensure that humans involved in research are treated with dignity and that their wellbeing is not compromised
Ensure that informed consent is obtained in the case of human participants
Grant institutional approval in instances where research proposals and protocols meet ethical standards
Monitor all research that it has approved
The ZWE-GCP states that the EC should obtain all the information relating to the trial including the protocol, investigators brochure, patient consent forms, insurance for participants, current curriculum vitaes for investigators, and literature detailing the rationale for the study. In its review, the EC should consider the following:

The suitability of the investigator for the proposed trial based on qualifications, experience, supporting staff, and available facilities; the suitability of the protocol in relation to the objectives of the study—its scientific efficiency and risk/benefit, including after the study, particularly in relation to chronic life-threatening conditions
The adequacy and completeness of the written information to be given to the participants, their relatives, guardians, and if necessary, legal representatives
Methods of initial recruitment, delivery of full information, and obtaining informed consent
Provision for compensation/treatment in the case of injury or death of a participant if attributed to a clinical trial, and any insurance or indemnity to cover the liability of the investigator and sponsor
The extent to which investigators and participants may be rewarded/compensated for participation
The suitability of the study population, whether they constitute a vulnerable group, if so whether the study is justified and whether sufficient measures to protect their interest are in place
Whether the number of participants to be recruited is adequate to demonstrate the predicted effect
The risk-benefit analysis takes into account full awareness of benefits and harms beyond the life of the study itself, particularly in relation to chronic life-threatening conditions
Whether placebos can be justified
That by their participation in a clinical study the participants are not denied timely access to medical personnel investigations, equipment, or procedures
That the application allows the participants and/or their representatives’ adequate time to consider the patient information package before informed consent is sought
Per CTEthics, the EC may approve, require amendment to, or reject a research proposal, and it must record its decisions in writing and should include its reasons for rejection. In considering a research protocol, the EC may seek assistance from experts, provided such experts have no conflicts of interest in relation to the research project under consideration. The EC must be satisfied that the research protocol considers participants’ welfare, rights, beliefs, perceptions, customs, and cultural heritage. For research to be conducted in community settings, the proposal must include a clear plan on how the communities will be consulted or involved in the research process, and how they are to be kept informed. Communication between sponsors and ECs should be directed through the principal investigator (PI). All documents and other material used to inform potential research participants should be approved by the EC, including plain-language information sheets, consent forms, questionnaires, advertisements, and letters. An EC may establish procedures for expedited review of research when this is in the public interest. Expedited review and approval may be considered for research where participants have a disease that may be rapidly fatal. In general, research with potential to cause physical or psychological harm should not be considered for expedited review. This includes drug trials, research involving invasive procedures and research involving sensitive personal or cultural issues. Per ZWE-GCP, the EC should give its opinion and advice in writing clearly identifying the trial, the documents reviewed, and the dates of review.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

As described in the CTEthics, the MRCZ’s NHRDC provides health researchers and institutions with independent ethical advice and clearance of research protocols intended to be conducted in Zimbabwe. According to ZWE-9, all health research conducted in Zimbabwe by any individual or institution is required to receive NHRDC approval before initiation. The MRCZ’s Board/Council may further review, approve, or disapprove health research that has been approved or not approved by the NHRDC, as appropriate. (See the Ethics Committee section for details on the MRCZ, and its Board/Council and technical committees.) Further per ZWE-49, the MRCZ’s ethical approval should be submitted to the MCAZ, or proof of submission of an application for MRCZ approval in case of parallel submission.

Per ZWE-GCP, the study’s institutional EC must apply for ethical clearance by the MRCZ. However, the CTEthics states that the PI submits the application to the MRCZ. The clinical trial application is sent to one (1) primary reviewer and two (2) external reviewers who document their comments at the NHRDC/MRCZ meetings. After 3-6 weeks, the reviewers’ and NHRDC/MRCZ’s comments are sent to the researcher for feedback. Per ZWE-9, all health research conducted in Zimbabwe by any individual or institution is required to receive approval of the NHRDC before initiation. The MRCZ may further review, approve, or disapprove health research that has been approved or not approved by the NHRDC, as appropriate. The CTEthics states that if conditional approval is granted, the sponsor should register with the RCZ if it has foreign researchers. The MRCZ’s approval is issued upon payment of a 1% levy and production of a RCZ registration permit, if applicable.

For continuing review, ZWE-41 states that MRCZ requires investigators to submit an annual review form (ZWE-42). ZWE-11 indicates that if investigators wish to amend or modify an ongoing MRCZ-approved research study, they must submit a request to the MRCZ and receive MRCZ approval before implementing the proposed modification, unless the change is designed to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to participants.

Ethics Committee Fees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Institutional Ethics Committees

The CTEthics indicates that an institutional ethics committee (EC) should establish and record working procedures concerning review fees charged.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

Pursuant to CTEthics, ZWE-41, and ZWE-11, the prescribed fees (posted in US dollars) for ethical review by the national EC, the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ), are as follows (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in all sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Normal registration for new study: $500 USD
Expedited review for new study: $1,000 USD
Exemption review for new study: $200 USD
Undergraduate students: $10 USD
Masters level dissertation: $50 USD
PhD students: $200 USD
Penalty for late submission of annual continuing review application: $200 USD after 30 days; $1,200 USD exceeding six (6) months
Application for study extension: $100 USD per study
Levies: 1% of total study for MRCZ monitoring and administration or a flat fee of $100 USD with a budget of less than $10,000 USD
Inspection fee: $300 USD (only applicable if inspection is requested)
Amendment application: $50 USD per amendment
Expedited amendment: $100 USD per expedited amendment
Penalty for late submission of serious adverse events: $20 USD per day
Payment Instructions

Per ZWE-41, payments should be submitted to the following bank:

MRCZ NOSTRO
NMB Bank
Account Name: Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
NOSTRO Account number: 0000350046119
Branch Code: 11112
Branch: EXCELLENCE
Bank: NMB Bank Limited

Oversight of Ethics Committees
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

In addition to its research ethics review function, the CTEthics indicates that the role of the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) is to promote, accredit, and monitor compliance of institutional ethics committees (ECs) within relevant legislation and regulations, ethical guidelines, and standards.

Registration Auditing, and Accreditation

No information is currently available.

Submission Process
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the MSCAct, the MSC-Regs, the CT-AppAuth, the ZWE-GCP, and ZWE-4, Zimbabwe requires the sponsor to obtain clinical trial authorization from the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ). MCAZ is responsible for regulating and authorizing clinical trials of investigational products (IPs) in human participants in Zimbabwe, with the National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA) and the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ) also playing important regulatory roles. Per the ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, parallel submissions are encouraged among the regulatory authorities and to the national ethics committee (EC), the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ). However, as indicated in ProcForeignReg, approval by the MRCZ is a prerequisite for RCZ consideration of a research permit application by a foreign researcher.

Regulatory Submission

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the CT-AppAuth, to obtain MCAZ review and authorization, the sponsor must file a clinical trial application (CTA) on form MC 10 (ZWE-28) via the Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-1) and include the appropriate fee and all the relevant documents. For guidance on how to navigate ZWE-1, refer to the user manual (ZWE-85). While there is no language requirement indicated, the application form (ZWE-28) is in English. Note that per the ZWE-GCP, both the English and applicable vernacular versions (e.g., Shona/Ndebele) must be used in consent materials.

CT-AppAuth indicates that a letter of acknowledgement of receipt of the CTA will be sent to the principal investigator (PI) by ZWE-1. Note the CT-AppAuth indicates that researchers may request a pre-submission meeting or submit pre-submission questions prior to submission of CTAs. Requests for pre-submission meetings should be submitted in writing to MCAZ with a summary of the proposed study, a list of preliminary questions, a summary of significant quality aspects of the IP, and any other pertinent documents. ZWE-37 is the meeting request form, which is also available at the MCAZ reception. (See the Regulatory Authority section for contact information.) According to ZWE-65, during a pre-submission meeting, participants may discuss document screening, fee quotations, and/or the applicable regulations.

As delineated in the CT-AppAuth, clinical trial amendments must be submitted to the MCAZ for review and approval using the appropriate form (ZWE-84 for protocol amendments; ZWE-32 for investigators/sites), with applicable fees. Urgent amendments deemed crucial to protect participants or the community may be implemented immediately, but the EC and MCAZ must be notified within 48 hours, followed by a full submission. Amendments affecting participant safety (e.g., dose, regimen, monitoring) require written MCAZ approval before implementation; other changes may be implemented only after MCAZ approval. Minor amendments are those not affecting safety, design, or results; major amendments are those that do. Certain changes—such as a new study product, new arms, or major study design/objective changes—require a new clinical trial application. See the CT-AppAuth for additional details.

Per CT-AppAuth, the MCAZ implements an expedited review pathway for certain clinical trial applications. This pathway can be used in the case of public health emergencies. The documentation to be submitted will be the same as outlined above but could be revised on a case-by-case basis. Researchers are encouraged to have pre-submission meetings with the MCAZ to discuss their protocol and any anticipated problems so that the approval process will be shortened. The MCAZ will also coordinate with relevant stakeholders such as the World Health Organization (WHO), the African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF), the MRCZ, and others when necessary to achieve the desired result. To initiate the submission process, the applicant should send an email of intention to the MRCZ and the MCAZ, with a copy to the AVAREF Secretariat at afrgoavaref@who.int. The MRCZ and the MCAZ will then set up a pre-submission meeting with the applicant and communicate the meeting outcome to the AVAREF Secretariat. Also see the ZWE-GCP for additional guidance on this emergency process.

Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per the CT-AppAuth and ProcForeignReg, to obtain a research permit from the RCZ, foreign researchers should seek an affiliated institution in the area of the intended research in Zimbabwe. The ProcForeignReg further explains that if accepted by that institution, then the institution of affiliation in Zimbabwe forwards the application to the RCZ. Recognized institutions of affiliation are universities, government ministries, and government departments that run their own budgets, and whose head is an accounting officer, as well as any other publicly funded institutions as determined by the RCZ. ZWE-12 also indicates that the following organizations are recognized as institutions of affiliation by the RCZ:

All government research stations
All government ministries and departments
All universities
According to the ProcForeignReg, private and foreign institutions can have special collaborative arrangements with Zimbabwean public institutions. All foreign researchers must submit the application form (ZWE-59) and pay a non-refundable application fee of US $500.00, or as determined by the RCZ. (See the Regulatory Fees section for more information on paying this fee.)

The Trslt-Ntc requires foreign researchers to use qualified translation institutions for translation of research materials. All translated research materials should be accompanied by a confirmation from a qualified translation institution. See ZWE-5 for a list of qualified language institutions.

National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the NBA-Proc, vaccine clinical trial protocols must be submitted by the investigator to the institutional biosafety committee (IBC), followed by submission to the NBA. The applicant must answer all questions set forth in the NBA-Proc. The IBC will forward the proposal to the NBA after its approval. Where a proposal includes commercially sensitive information, the applicant may mark relevant portions as “Commercial-in-confidence” with reasons. Where material is clearly so marked, the NBA will treat it as confidential unless it decides that some disclosure is necessary. In that event, the NBA will notify the applicant in writing and subsequently negotiate a mutually agreed upon resolution. If agreement is not reached, then the proposal may be withdrawn, without disclosure or prejudice, at any time prior to the necessary disclosure in pursuit of approval. For clinical trials involving biological products, the MCAZ requires NBA approval or proof of application to the NBA.

Ethics Review Submission

Institutional Ethics Committee

According to the ZWE-GCP, the CTEthics, and ZWE-41, all research involving human participants in Zimbabwe must be reviewed by an institutional EC, followed by the national EC, the MRCZ. The submission process at institutional ECs will vary. For an example of an institutional EC submission process, see ZWE-25.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

CTEthics states that the PI must submit an application to the MRCZ and bears full responsibility for the scientific and ethical aspects of the study. To submit an application for MRCZ ethical review, ZWE-41 specifies that all electronic copies must be submitted in PDF format, and that application forms not completed electronically will not be accepted. (Note that ZWE-41 states that undergraduate and masters students are required to submit two (2) clearly labelled flat file copies of the required documents, while ZWE-11 indicates that students must submit two (2) hard copies of all the required documents.) Per ZWE-41 and ZWE-11, electronic copies of applications should be submitted to mrcz@mrcz.org.zw. Per ZWE-44, applicants should respond to comments using the MRCZ form (ZWE-44) within two (2) weeks of receipt of comments from the MRCZ.

Per ZWE-55, to withdraw an MRCZ application, all research activities must not have been implemented. The form (ZWE-55) and a cover letter must be submitted to MRCZ. The PI must also notify all relevant authorities that the protocol has been withdrawn from consideration by the MRCZ.

As indicated in ProcForeignReg, MRCZ approval is a prerequisite for RCZ consideration of a research permit application by a foreign researcher or for shipment of biospecimens. Per ZWE-89, the MRCZ will forward the application for registration of a foreign researcher to the RCZ. The applicant must prepare 10 flat files, with each document in all of the 10 files clearly labeled. Of the 10 copies, eight (8) are for the RCZ, one (1) is for the MRCZ, and one (1) is for the applicant. Both the MRCZ and the RCZ must sign ZWE-89 and receive a copy of it.

Submission Content
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Regulatory Authority Requirements

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

As specified in the CT-AppAuth, a clinical trial submission package to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) should contain the following documents:

Cover letter
Study protocol
Investigator’s brochure
Clinical trial pharmacy protocol/plan and MCAZ pharmacy license, where applicable (See the Pharm-IMPs for guidance on the pharmacy plan)
Documentation of participant insurance for trial-related injuries
Letter endorsing generic insurance certificate, if necessary
Ethics approval or copy of letter applying for ethics committee (EC) approval and other relevant Zimbabwean regulatory approvals
Proof of approval of study by the national regulatory authority in country of origin
Proof of provision of Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB), Data Monitoring Committee, or Safety Monitoring Committee
Monitoring plan
Signed declarations: the declarations for good clinical practice (GCP) compliance by the principal investigator (PI) (ZWE-34) and the co- and sub-investigators (ZWE-33); joint declaration by the sponsor and PI regarding sufficient funds to complete the study (ZWE-35); and the applicant’s declaration (ZWE-90) that the package is complete and truthful and the study will be conducted in accordance with applicable legal, ethical, and regulatory requirements
Recruitment advertisements (if applicable)
Patient information leaflet(s) and informed consent forms (ICF), including vernacular versions and English translations; the MSC-Regs requires the participant’s consent be documented in ZWE-30
Pharmaceutical dossier for new investigational products (IP), including stability data (Where some of the proprietary information on the IP is not available to the PI, the sponsor or manufacturer can send the IP directly to the MCAZ)
Any other relevant attachments such as GCP certificates and curriculum vitaes (CVs) for the investigator(s), coordinator(s), or monitor(s); see ZWE-36 for the recommended CV format
In addition, according to ZWE-83, for biological products (e.g., vaccines), proof of application to the local Bio Safety Board must also be submitted. In addition, MCAZ is open to a pre-submission meeting with the protocol team.

Regarding applications for amendments, the CT-AppAuth requires the following to be submitted:

A cover letter from the PI
Proof of fee payment
The amendment application form (ZWE-84)
Each amendment in bold and deleted text struck through
A table in a covering letter that details all amended parts of the protocol with reasons or justification
A description of the possible consequences for participants already enrolled must be described; if the amendments affect the participants, describe the inclusion and/or exclusion criteria, dosage regimen, safety, visits, etc.
An amended informed consent form, as needed
Any additional risks or safety issues
The amended supporting documents should be appended, including any new relevant publications
Protocol or documentation with tracked changes and clean copy of the protocol or documentation
National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the NBA-Proc, an application for approval of a vaccine or biological product must provide answers to all the questions in NBA-Proc pertaining to:

Aims and objectives
The nature of the vaccine
Population size and location of release
Habitat and ecology
The route of administration and associated safety concerns and treatment regimes
Post-trial vaccine uses and risks to general population
Existing evidence regarding level and duration of immunity
Guidelines regarding waste disposal of the vaccine and its residue
Information on use of the host vaccine organism in other human or animal vaccines
See NBA-Proc for additional considerations and the detailed questions.

Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per ProcForeignReg, foreign researchers must submit the following application materials to obtain a research permit from the RCZ:

Clear statement of the purpose of their intended research on the application forms
Ten copies of the completed application form (ZWE-59), and one (1) research proposal per project must be submitted to The Executive Director of the Research Council of Zimbabwe (See the Regulatory Authority section for contact details); for joint projects, one (1) comprehensive research proposal is required and each applicant must submit 13 copies of the completed application form (ZWE-59)
Ten copies of completed Specimens Transfer Agreement form (ZWE-63) if the application involves shipment of specimens
Thirteen copies of the Materials Transfer Agreement form (ZWE-62) for shipment of non-biological specimens
Thirteen copies of each letter of support from a Zimbabwean institution of affiliation and other institutions that may be consulted during the research
Evidence of adequate funds for the period of research
In addition, ZWE-10 states that for expedited review, the clinical trial application must include:

A letter directed to the Executive Director of RCZ stating the reasons for expediting
Proof of payment of RCZ fees
Ethics Committee Requirements

Institutional Ethics Committees

The submission process at institutional ECs will vary. For an example of institutional EC submission content requirements, see ZWE-25.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

ZWE-41 specifies the following submission content requirements:

Masters & Bachelors of Science (BSc) students must submit two (2) clearly labelled flat file copies of the following:

Completed MRCZ application form (ZWE-41)
Research proposal summary (maximum four (4) pages)
Full research proposal
Informed consent forms (ICFs) on MRCZ template: English, appropriate vernacular versions
Data collection tools: English and vernacular versions (Shona/Ndebele/appropriate language)
Letter of support from supervisor
Proof of registration with learning institution
University or institutional EC approval
Supplementary information as applicable
Permission letter from head of institution where data is to be collected (For research in schools, a letter from the Ministry of Education is a requirement)
CV of the student
PhD students should submit an electronic copy of the following:

Completed MRCZ application form (ZWE-41)
Full research proposal
Research proposal summary (maximum four (4) pages)
ICFs on MRCZ ICF template (English, applicable local languages, and backtranslations)
Specimen Storage and shipment consent form (English, applicable local languages, and backtranslations)
Questionnaires and any other data collection tools (English, applicable local languages, and backtranslations)
Drug brochure or supplementary information if applicable
CVs for the principal and co-investigators
Proof of registration with learning institution
Evidence of International Council for Harmonisation’s (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) training
Letter from academic supervisor authorizing submission of proposal to MRCZ
Name, contact details, and detailed CV of academic supervisor(s)
For candidates registered with foreign institutions, contact details and letter from proposed local co-supervisor/adviser confirming willingness to supervise/advise
University or institutional EC approval
Permission letter from head of institution where data is to be collected (For research in schools, a letter from the Ministry of Education is a requirement)
For individual researcher studies and exemption reviews, an electronic copy of the following should be submitted:

Completed MRCZ application form (ZWE-41)
Research proposal summary (maximum four (4) pages)
Full research proposal
Evidence of ICH-GCP training for investigators
ICFs on MRCZ template (in English, appropriate local language, and backtranslations)
Data collection tools (in English, appropriate local language, and backtranslations)
CVs for the principal and co-investigators
Drug brochure or supplementary information if applicable
University or institutional EC approval
Permission letter from head of institution where data is to be collected (For research in schools, a letter from the Ministry of Education is a requirement)
Proof of funding on sponsor’s letterhead
For applications for continuing review of research and for amendments/modifications, investigators should use ZWE-42 and ZWE-43, respectively. An application for extension of the research duration must be submitted to the MRCZ using the form at ZWE-51.

Per ZWE-89, an application for registration of a foreign researcher must contain 10 copies of each of the following documents (to be forwarded by MRCZ to RCZ):

Application letter from institution of affiliation
MRCZ cover letter
A valid MRCZ approval letter
RCZ application form (ZWE-59) or renewal form (ZWE-60)
Proof of funding
PI’s and co-investigators’ CVs
Study summary
Study protocol
ICFs in English and Shona
Questionnaire
Research report if application is for renewal
Current registration certificate if application is for renewal
GCP certificate
Temporary employment permit, where applicable
Identification documents if applicant is a permanent resident
Proof of payment of RCZ registration fee
See Specimen Import & Export section for the submission content for shipment of biospecimens.

Clinical Protocol

According to the CT-AppAuth, the clinical protocol should contain the follow elements:

General information, including the protocol title, version number, and date
Contact information for the sponsor, monitor, person(s) authorized to sign the protocol and protocol amendment for the sponsor, the sponsor’s medical expert for the trial, the investigator(s), the qualified physician who is responsible for medical decisions, and the clinical laboratory(ies) and other entities involved in the trial
Justification for the study
Name and description of the IP(s)
The risk-benefit assessment
Description of the route of administration, dosage, dosage regimen, and treatment period
A statement that the trial will comply with the protocol and all other regulatory requirements
Description of the population to be studied with adequate justification for vulnerable participants
Trial objectives and purpose
Trial design
Treatment of study participants
Assessment of efficacy
Safety information, including safety parameters, adverse event reporting procedures, specimens collection procedures, and the names, composition, and qualifications of the Drug Safety Monitoring Board
Statistics
Agreement that the investigator will permit inspections and direct access to source data/documents from the MCAZ and the MRCZ
Quality control and quality assurance in line with ZWE-73
Timeline of Review
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

Per ZWE-GCP, parallel submissions are encouraged among the regulatory authorities, which comprise the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ), the National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe (NBA), and the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ), and to the national ethics committee (EC)—the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ). However as indicated in ProcForeignReg, approval by the MRCZ is a prerequisite for the RCZ’s consideration of a research permit application by a foreign researcher.

Regulatory Authority Approval

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

As described in the CT-AppAuth, the review and approval process in Zimbabwe should take 60 working days from the time the completed application is received by the MCAZ’s Pharmacovigilance and Clinical Trials (PVCT) Division up until approval. This timeline excludes the time when the applicant is addressing any follow-up questions from the PVCT. In addition, MCAZ implements an expedited review pathway for certain clinical trial applications. The expedited review timeline is 15-30 working days subject to submission of a complete application package.

Per CT-AppAuth, if Zimbabwe has been declared to be in a public health emergency, a timeline of 10 working days is recommended for processing of clinical trial applications where the product is already registered for other indication(s), or for old products which are known and 15 working days for novel products. These timelines are for the entire process from receipt application to the final decision, with the exception of clock stops in line with ZWE-75. The MCAZ will also coordinate with relevant stakeholders such as the World Health Organization (WHO), the African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF), the MRCZ, and others when necessary.

National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe

While the NBA does not have review timelines available, ZWE-74 indicates that the review of vaccine clinical trial applications take approximately four (4) to six (6) weeks.

Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per ZWE-83, the RCZ review period is usually between six (6) to eight (8) weeks, with meeting dates scheduled on the last Thursday of every month for the review of submissions.

Ethics Committee Approval

Institutional Ethics Committees

The timeline of review at institutional ECs will vary. For an example of institutional EC review procedures, see ZWE-25.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per ZWE-11, it takes four (4) to six (6) weeks for MRCZ to review a clinical trial application. According to ZWE-74, clinical trials conducted in response to a public health emergency qualify for expedited review and will be reviewed within 10 business days. ZWE-41 lays out the following turnaround timelines (i.e., review period):

Individual researcher/studies: four (4) to six (6) weeks
Fast-track review for new studies: 10 working days
Exemption review for new studies: 10 working days
PhD students: four (4) to six (6) weeks
Masters students: five (5) working days
Undergraduate students: five (5) working days
Initiation, Agreements & Registration
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ZWE-GCP, all clinical trials of medicines in Zimbabwe involving human participants must not be initiated until the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) has authorized the conduct of the trial, with the approval of the Secretary for Health and Child Care at the Ministry of Health and Child Care (MOHCC), in accordance with the MSCAct, the MSC-Regs, and the MSC-ImportExport. Per the MSCAct and the CT-AppAuth, once a clinical trial is approved, the principal investigator (PI) is required to complete and sign the indemnity form (ZWE-40) appended to the authorization certificate and return it to the MCAZ prior to commencement of the clinical trial. The MSCAct mandates that before commencing an authorized clinical trial, the investigator must inform all participants about the aims and objectives of the clinical trial and how it will be conducted; the possible risks, discomforts, and other adverse effects that may result; and provide insurance to each participant to cover trial-related injuries.

The ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth require that clinical trials in Zimbabwe be conducted in accordance with good clinical practice (GCP) in ZWE-GCP, which is derived from the International Council for Harmonisation’s (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZWE-73) and other international guidance material. Further, regarding the conduct of clinical trials, the ZWE-GCP states that it should be read in conjunction with other ICH guidelines (ZWE-80) such as E2A (clinical safety data management), E3 (clinical study reporting), E7 (geriatric populations), E8 (general considerations for clinical trials), E9 (statistical principles), and E11 (pediatric populations).

Clinical Trial Agreement

Prior to initiating the trial, ZWE-GCP requires a written agreement between the sponsor and investigators as part of the protocol or in a separate agreement. The sponsor must obtain the investigators’/institutions’ agreement on the following items:

The trial will be conducted in compliance with GCP and with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor
The trial will comply with procedures for data recording/reporting and permits monitoring, auditing, and inspection/access according to the protocol; regarding access, all parties must agree to ensure direct access to all trial-related sites, source data/documents, and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities
The definition, establishment, and assignment of responsibilities specified in the protocol, including data management, unblinding of treatment codes, statistical considerations, and preparation of the final clinical report
The sponsor and all investigators must sign and date the protocol to confirm agreement. In addition, the financial aspects of the trial should be documented in an agreement between the sponsor and the investigator/institution. Upon signing the application, all parties accept the responsibility that all applicable regulations and requirements will be adhered to. Furthermore, all parties are responsible for ensuring that the trial is based on and implemented according to well-founded ethical and scientific principles, as expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki (ZWE-70) and local and international guidelines for GCP.

See the Site/Investigator Selection section for details on selection requirements for investigators and clinical trial sites.

Clinical Trial Registration

As per the CT-AppAuth, the Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-1) is the platform for both submitting clinical trial applications and registering approved clinical trials. In addition, the PI must submit the approved clinical trial to a publicly accessible registry platform, such as the Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (PACTR) platform (ZWE-27).

Safety Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Safety Reporting Definitions

According to the ZWE-GCP, the following definitions provide a basis for a common understanding of Zimbabwe’s safety reporting requirements:

Adverse Event (AE) – Any undesirable experience occurring to a participant during a clinical trial, whether or not considered related to the investigational product(s) (IP). An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not related to the IP.
Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI) – Any untoward medical occurrence that follows immunization and does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the usage of the vaccine. The AE may be any unfavorable or unintended sign, abnormal laboratory finding, symptom, or disease.
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) – A response to a medicinal product that is noxious and unintended, and which occurs at doses normally used for the prophylaxis, diagnosis, or therapy of disease, or for the modification of physiological function. In the pre-approval clinical experience with a new medicinal product or its new intended usages, particularly as the therapeutic dose(s) may not be established, this includes all unintended responses to any dose. The phrase “responses to a medicinal product” means that a causal relationship between a medicinal product and an AE is at least a reasonable possibility.
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) – Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose results in death, is life threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or is a congenital anomaly/birth defect.
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction – An adverse reaction, the nature or severity of which is not consistent with the applicable product information (e.g., Investigator's Brochure for an unapproved IP or package insert/summary of product characteristics for an approved product).
See the CTEthics for additional guidance on safety definitions.

Safety Reporting Requirements

Investigator Responsibilities

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ZWE-GCP, all AE safety reports must be submitted to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ)’s Pharmacovigilance Electronic Reporting System (ZWE-76). The principal investigator (PI) is responsible for reporting safety reports to MCAZ and is required to report Individual Case Safety Reports (AEs, ADRs and/or AEFIs) to the MCAZ. Reports of SAEs during the trial must be reported promptly to the MCAZ as soon as possible but no later than seven (7) calendar days of occurrence being known by the PI/investigators, followed by as complete a report as possible within eight (8) additional calendar days. This report must include an assessment of the importance and implication of the findings, including relevant previous experience with the same or similar medicinal products. The PI is required to submit an online safety report on the MCAZ e-PV system (ZWE-76). The safety report summaries, including known and unknown as AE/SAE/AEFI log and Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)/Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) interim data analysis reports, are also required. The SAE report form should be complete and detailed, including information such as laboratory results submitted to enable causality assessment of the report. Follow-up information should also be submitted as soon as it becomes available within eight (8) additional calendar days, including copies of diagnostic test results, laboratory reports, or medical record progress notes. All additional information should be clearly marked as updated information and should include the Protocol Number and Volunteer ID Number. MCAZ’s advisory Pharmacovigilance and Clinical Trials Committee, which meets monthly and does causality assessment of the reports, sends written feedback to the PI. MCAZ may need to contact the clinical site for additional information regarding the SAE. For additional guidance on using ZWE-76, see ZWE-87.

Further, CT-AppAuth states that the PI should submit non-serious AEs as line listings and summaries during the submission of annual reports. Foreign individual case safety reports should be reported within seven (7) days when there is a major safety issue or regulatory decision which impacts/changes the risk-benefit profile of the product or on specific request by MCAZ. IP defect(s) are also required to be reported in line with the MCAZ product defect form and MCAZ guidelines for the Notification of a Medicinal Product Problem or Defect and Recall Procedure in Zimbabwe available on MCAZ’s website: www.mcaz.co.zw. DSMB/DMC and other types of safety reports in relation to the benefit/risk assessment of the study safety and subsequent protocol amendments or clarification memorandums should also be submitted to MCAZ on ZWE-76. Reports on protocol deviation(s) and violation(s) including the corrective action taken should also be submitted to MCAZ.

According to CTEthics, all AE reports and management issues should be transmitted to the ethics committee (EC), ideally through the PI, who should be fully informed of these issues. The investigator must sign the adverse event table (ZWE-48) and submit it to the EC.

Per ZWE-11, investigators must submit prompt reports to the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) of any unanticipated problems involving risks to the participants or others, and reports of serious or continuing noncompliance with the regulations or the EC’s requirements. If a death occurs during the research, ZWE-46 requires that the death report form (ZWE-46) be submitted to the MRCZ within three (3) days of the site becoming aware. The entire death report form must be completed by a certified medical practitioner. With regard to protocol deviations, each incident of deviation or violation must be reported to the MRCZ within seven (7) days of site awareness using the form at ZWE-53. If an institutional EC terminates a study, the investigators must report it to the MRCZ using the form at ZWE-47. The form at ZWE-56 must be used to apply to MRCZ for re-opening a study that had been previously terminated.

According to the CTEthics, the PI bears full responsibility for the scientific and ethical aspects of their study, and are the means of communication with the EC. The PharmVigHdbk affirms that the investigator is responsible for proper reporting of SAEs to the MCAZ. The ZWE-GCP requires the investigator to ensure that all SAEs are reported promptly to the MCAZ, the sponsor, and the EC. Proper protection procedures or treatments should be administered to trial participants experiencing SAEs. When significant noncompliance with the trial protocol is discovered, the PI should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions. The PI is required to submit a protocol deviation report to the MCAZ within seven (7) days of site awareness of the deviation or violation, including deviations from, or changes to, the protocol to eliminate immediate hazards to the trial participants; changes that increase the risk to participants and/or affect significantly the conduct of the trial; all ADRs that are both serious and unexpected; and new information that may affect adversely the safety of participants or the conduct of the trial. Per ZWE-11, in addition to the requirements of a particular research study, investigators are responsible for ongoing safety requirements in the conduct of approved research.

Sponsor Responsibilities

The ZWE-GCP requires the sponsor to report all AEs occurring during the course of the trial to the MCAZ. The sponsor should expedite reporting all SAEs to the EC and the MCAZ and immediately undertake appropriate and necessary measures and treatment to protect trial participants in coordination with the investigator(s). Further, the sponsor must submit requested records within 48 hours if safety concerns arise.

Form Completion & Delivery Requirements

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the CT-AppAuth and ZWE-GCP, the sponsor must submit all AE safety reports to ZWE-76. To view the ADR form, see ZWE-38; to view the SAE form, see ZWE-39. Separate forms must be used for separate reportable AEs. The ZWE-GCP states that if there are any challenges accessing ZWE-76, hard copies of the safety report should be submitted to the MCAZ, including causality outcome by the sponsor and participant management. ZWE-66 provides the following MCAZ address for delivery of hard copies:

Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
106 Baines Avenue
Harare, Zimbabwe

Institutional Ethics Committees

Because each EC has its own form completion and delivery requirements, investigators and sponsors should review their EC procedures.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

To submit forms and for more information, contact the MRCZ. Per ZWE-78, MRCZ’s contact information is:

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
20 Cambridge Road
Avondale
Harare, Zimbabwe
Phone: +263 86 44073 772

Progress Reporting
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Interim and Annual Progress Reports

Medical Control Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ZWE-GCP, principal investigators (PIs) are required to submit annual progress reports (ZWE-77) for all ongoing clinical trials to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ). ZWE-77 specifies that all sections of the form must be completed electronically. The form and accompanying documents must be submitted by January 31st annually to the MCAZ office or via email at mcaz@mcaz.co.zw. The progress report should contain the following:

MCAZ reference number
Actual date of commencement and the study duration; indicate if an extension is requested
Protocol version number
Study title
Study sites
Reporting period
Institution
PI name, address, phone number, and email
Other contact information, if applicable
Regulatory compliance information, including the number of good clinical practice (GCP) monitoring visits, GCP audits, the insurance certificate, the clinical trial indemnity form, the MCAZ premises license for the research pharmacy, and the investigational product (IP) approval
Study status, including information on enrollment and data analysis
Total number of people consented and screened and, of those, total number eligible for the study
Total number of participants to which the IP has been administered
Number of participants left to be enrolled in the coming months (years)
Number of participants in the following categories: currently active in study; follow-up data collection only; completed intervention and any follow-up; and lost to follow-up
Information on adverse events, protocol deviations/violations, complications, and withdrawals
Status of the IP, including how many were imported, records of destruction, and any quality issues
Research Council of Zimbabwe

ProcForeignReg requires that all foreign researcher applications for extensions of research permits be accompanied by a brief progress report of the completed research to the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ). The renewal registration form (ZWE-60) should be submitted together with a progress report, institution of affiliation letter, Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) conditional approval letter, summary protocol, proof of funding, and the proof of payment of RCZ registration. This must be submitted not later than one (1) month before the expiration date.

Institutional Ethics Committees

Per the CTEthics, the ethics committee (EC) must ensure that the conduct of all research is monitored. At least annually, the EC must request reports from the PI on matters including:

Progress to date, or outcome in the case of completed research
Information concerning maintenance and security of records
Evidence of compliance with the approved protocol
Evidence of compliance with any conditions of approval
ECs should inform the PI, in writing, of decisions made after the review of progress reports. An EC may recommend and adopt any additional appropriate mechanism for monitoring, including the random inspection of research sites, data, signed consent forms, and records of interviews, with the prior consent of research participants. Because each EC has its own reporting requirements, investigators and sponsors should review their EC procedures.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per ZWE-11, investigators are responsible for ensuring that progress reports and requests for continuing review are submitted to the MRCZ.

Final Report

Medical Control Authority of Zimbabwe

Per the MSCAct and the ZWE-GCP, not later than 30 days after the completion of a clinical trial, the PI is required to submit to the MCAZ a preliminary report on the ethical evaluation of the clinical trial. Then, not later than 90 days after the completion of the trial, a comprehensive report and a report on any serious or adverse events found during the trial must be submitted to the MCAZ.

In contrast, CT-AppAuth requires the PI and sponsor to submit a preliminary final report three (3) months after completion of the study and a final report six (6) months after completion of the study including any publications. The final report should follow international expectations for clinical trial reporting, including the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZWE-73). There must be a complete and comprehensive description of the study and its outcomes. The protocol, statistical, and clinical aspects should be included in the final study report to be able to verify that the final report is consistent with the study data generated. A final report is also required for a study that may be prematurely stopped due to safety reasons or other reasons. The MCAZ prohibits dissemination or publication of clinical trial results without prior submission of the same results to the MCAZ.

Research Council of Zimbabwe

ProcForeignReg requires that foreign researchers submit a detailed report and end of study form to the RCZ and the National Archives within one (1) year of completing the research.

Institutional Ethics Committees

Because each EC has its own requirements, investigators and sponsors should review their EC’s final report procedures.

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe

Per ZWE-11, the investigator submits a final report to the MRCZ when the clinical trial is complete, i.e., all interventions or interactions with participants have been completed, and all data collection and analysis have been finished. The investigator notifies the MRCZ through a completely filled in termination form (ZWE-47) with the final report attached. In compliance with confidentiality requirements, the investigator may keep the data collected, including identifiable private data, consistent with the MRCZ-approved research plan. In addition, the investigator should meet other commitments that were agreed to as part of the approved research, for example, providing information about the study results to research participants, or honoring commitments for compensation to participants.

Definition of Sponsor
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Per the ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, a sponsor is defined as an individual, company, institution, or organization that takes responsibility for the initiation, management, and/or financing of a trial. The CT-AppAuth adds that this excludes an individual company, institution, or organization that has been requested to provide money for a trial and does not benefit in any way from the results of the trial. A sponsor can be foreign, however, per CT-AppAuth and ProcForeignReg, their researchers must apply for a research permit with the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ).

According to the ZWE-GCP, a sponsor may transfer any or all of the sponsor's trial-related duties and functions to a contract research organization (CRO), but the ultimate responsibility for the quality and integrity of the trial data always resides with the sponsor. Any trial-related duty and function that is transferred to and assumed by a CRO should be specified in writing and submitted for regulatory approval by the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) and the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) as protocol amendments. The sponsor should ensure oversight of any trial-related duties and functions carried out on its behalf, including trial-related duties and functions that are subcontracted to another party by the sponsor's CRO(s). Any trial-related duties and functions not specifically transferred to and assumed by a CRO are retained by the sponsor.

Site/Investigator Selection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

Per the ZWE-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for selecting investigators according to the availability of adequate clinical trial environment facilities and resources. CTEthics indicates that the investigator’s competence is assessed mainly by technical competence, including research competence, which is evaluated in terms of education, knowledge, certification, and experience. Compassion and empathy are among the characteristics required of a technically competent researcher. In all cases, the principal investigator (PI) must be a Zimbabwean-based researcher that is a permanent resident in Zimbabwe. To add or change sites, the PI must apply to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) for authorization by submitting the form at ZWE-32.

The ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth state that the sponsor should ensure all the selected investigators have sufficient training, qualifications, and capability, including (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Qualified by education, training, and experience to assume responsibility for the proper conduct of the trial, provide evidence of such qualifications, and be licensed under the HProfAct
The PI should provide evidence of qualifications and experience through an up-to-date curriculum vitae, and must have had previous experience as a co-investigator in at least two (2) trials in the relevant professional area
The PI should ensure that sufficient time has been allocated to conduct and complete the trial within the agreed time period
Be thoroughly familiar with the characteristics and appropriate use of the investigational product (IP) as described in the protocol, current investigator’s brochure, product information, and other information sources
Have a clear understanding and willingness to obey the ethical and legal requirements of the trial
Will permit monitoring and auditing of the trial and inspection by the MCAZ or appointed representatives
Will keep a list of appropriately qualified persons to whom the investigator has delegated significant trial-related duties
Have no history of misconduct
Have practical experience within the relevant professional area, is a resident of Zimbabwe, and will be responsible for the conduct of the clinical trial at a clinical site
Had formal training in good clinical practice (GCP) within the last three (3) years
Per ZWE-41, the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) requires evidence of International Council for Harmonisation’s (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) training in the clinical trial application for PhD students and individual researchers

The CT-AppAuth and the ZWE-GCP state that with regard to the capacity of the clinical trial site, all clinical trials must be carried out under conditions that ensure adequate safety for the participants. The site selected should be appropriate to the stage of IP development and any potential risks involved. The trial site must have adequate facilities, including laboratories, equipment, and sufficient medical, paramedical, and clerical staff to support the trial and to deal with all reasonably foreseeable emergencies. A Clinical Research Site (CRS) facility should be clean, secure, and designed to ensure proper conduct of the clinical trial, as well as protect participants’ safety, privacy, and confidentiality. It should offer the following, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Hazard free entrance area and, if possible, handicap accessibility
Reception area where a participant can sign in/register and wait for CRS staff
Private setting(s) for informed consent discussions and counselling
Adequately equipped examination rooms to conduct study visits and procedures
Participant treatment area and/or post-treatment observation area
Adequate infection-control equipment and processes
Rest area, where participants can relax for example between pharmacokinetic sample collections
Injection and/or infusion rooms
Synchronized clocks throughout the clinic, laboratory, and pharmacy for studies involving time-critical processes between clinic and pharmacy or between clinic and laboratory
Access to a sink and safety equipment in the laboratory
Power back-up system to ensure continuity of electricity, internet connection, etc.
Adequate space for monitoring visits
Data management area
Office/workspace
Record storage area/room
Emergency facilities
Per the CT-AppAuth, for studies to be conducted at hospitals or medical institutions, proof of approval to use the facilities should be submitted. The CRS is required to have a process/procedure and facilities in place to handle any emergencies during a participant visit, including arrangements with a local emergency service to transport a participant quickly and provide treatment in the event of an emergency. For first in human clinical trials, the emergency facilities should be available onsite and an emergency trolley to assist with emergency situations. The emergency trolley should be kept sealed/locked when not in use, and staff should document periodic (monthly) content checks for expiration dates and replacement need. All laboratory assays must be validated, and principles of Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) should be observed. See the ZWE-GCP for additional details on adequate facilities, instruments, equipment, and supplies.

Foreign Sponsor Responsibilities

Per CT-AppAuth, foreign researchers must apply for a research permit with the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ); they must also obtain RCZ approval to export biospecimens and/or materials. A foreign researcher is a non-Zimbabwean national and any person wishing to conduct research in Zimbabwe on behalf of a foreign institution, foreign organization, or other foreign person. As indicated in ProcForeignReg, foreign researchers should seek an institution of affiliation in the area of the intended research in Zimbabwe. If accepted by that institution, then the institution of affiliation in Zimbabwe forwards the application to the RCZ. Recognized institutions of affiliation are universities, government ministries, and government departments that run their own budgets, and whose head is an accounting officer, as well as any other publicly funded institutions as determined by the RCZ. Private and foreign institutions can have special collaborative arrangements with Zimbabwean public institutions.

ZWE-GCP states that a foreign sponsor (also called an external sponsor) has certain obligations when it conducts a clinical trial in Zimbabwe. The foreign sponsor should strengthen local capacity for ethical, scientific review, biomedical research, and provide healthcare services as described in ZWE-79. The foreign sponsor also has an ethical obligation to provide healthcare services that are essential to the safe conduct of the research and treatment of participants who suffer injury because of research intervention. In addition, the foreign sponsor should make the beneficial intervention or product developed as a result of the clinical trial reasonably available to the population or community concerned.

Data and Safety Monitoring Board

CT-AppAuth requires that clinical trials set up a data and safety monitoring board (DSMB) or data monitoring committee. The sponsor must appoint members of a DSMB by considering a selection of individuals with relevant expertise (such as statisticians and clinicians), experience in clinical trials and in serving on other DSMBs, and absence of serious conflicts of interest. The PI must submit a DSMB charter with information on the aims and objectives, the composition, the names of the chairperson and members, and how meetings will be organized. DSMB and other types of safety reports in relation to the benefit/risk assessment of the study safety and subsequent protocol amendments or clarification memorandums should also be submitted to MCAZ via the Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-1).

Multicenter Studies

According to CTEthics, multicenter studies should be appropriate to the local setting and modifications should be made when required to suit the local conditions. It is unacceptable for developed-country participants to be offered better standards of care than are offered to Zimbabwean participants in a similar study. When Zimbabwe is chosen for a trial or study that has not been undertaken in the country of origin, the sponsor must explain the reasons why. In terms of study design, special attention should be paid to the sampling strategy. Other issues in international studies include financing of the study, the appropriateness of incentive packages to research participants, and remuneration packages for investigators. With multi-national clinical trials, the sponsor must ensure the following:

Benefits accrue to participants in the host country
The potential benefits of research considerably outweigh potential risks or harms to vulnerable individuals and communities
Research is non-exploitative and in the best interests of the research participants and their community
Groups already vulnerable are provided with improved access to research
Research participants are encouraged to participate in planning and conducting studies
Research in developing countries is linked to capacity-building in healthcare, and to economic and educational empowerment to promote the delivery of healthcare and progress generally in the host country
Honest efforts are made to translate research findings into components of accessible care in the community being researched
Conflicts of interest are avoided
Research protocols are modified to suit the situation in local communities
Publication of articles should be inclusive of investigators as authors from both host and sponsoring countries where appropriate contributions have been made
Insurance & Compensation
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Insurance

Per the MSCAct, the MSC-Regs, and the ZWE-GCP, the sponsor must provide insurance cover for all trial participants. The coverage must include the costs of any trial-related injury and be adequate to cover those costs to resolution. The sponsor must provide insurance or should indemnify the investigator/institution against claims arising from the trial except for claims that arise from malpractice and/or negligence.

The ZWE-GCP further indicates that the sponsor must submit a certificate of insurance or a letter confirming such insurance cover and the amounts set aside or limits with the clinical trial application. The level of risk that participants will be exposed to will be different across phase I-IV trials and the type of clinical trial. The sponsor and principal investigator (PI) must provide insurance cover that will be adequate to match the risk involved in the clinical trial, but not less than $1,000 US dollars for each participant.

Compensation

In the case of external (foreign) sponsors, the ZWE-GCP imposes an ethical obligation to provide healthcare services that are essential to the safe conduct of the research, and the beneficial intervention or product developed as a result of the research reasonably available to the population or community concerned.

Injury or Death

Per the ZWE-GCP, all sponsors should establish policies and procedures that address the costs of treatment of trial participants in the event of trial-related injuries and provide insurance cover for all trial participants. There should be provisions for compensation/treatment in the case of injury or death of a participant and the extent to which participants may be rewarded/compensated for participation. Additionally, foreign sponsors have an ethical obligation to provide healthcare services that are essential to the treatment of participants who suffer injury because of research intervention.

Trial Participation

As specified in the ZWE-GCP, the participant should be informed of any prorated payment, if any, for participating in the trial. In the clinical trial application, all sponsors should explain the anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the participant and the anticipated expenses, if any, for participating in the trial. Per ZWE-49, the participant should be informed of any benefits that may reasonably be expected from the research, including if the benefit is expected to be primarily for others. Benefits may include money, free treatment, free medications, or free transportation. Money may be offered to reimburse expenses, time, inconvenience, and transportation. Money may not be used as an inducement to assume risks.

Post-Trial Access

The CT-AppAuth requires the PI to describe in the protocol the procedures put in place to ensure post-trial access for research participants who still need an intervention identified as beneficial in the trial. Only those participants who derive benefit from the investigational product will be considered. Benefit must be objective as well as significant to be clinically justifiable, and must be based on study endpoints, not only on investigator opinion. Post-trial access is not applicable for Phase I and II studies. However, it may be necessary for diseases such as cancer and/or rare diseases for which no other medicines or other standard of care is available. Follow-up studies or rollover studies may be proposed by the investigators to allow continued access to the medicines by participants until the product is registered or is available through the national program or any other approved means; these follow-up studies and rollover studies are considered as clinical trials and need to be approved and monitored by the MCAZ and ethics committees. Any other scenario is handled on a case-by-case basis by MCAZ.

Risk & Quality Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Quality Assurance/Quality Control

Per the CT-AppAuth and the ZWE-GCP, the sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance and quality control systems with written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, documented (recorded), and reported in compliance with the protocol, good clinical practice (GCP), and the applicable regulatory requirement(s). The sponsor must secure agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access to all trial-related sites, source data/documents, and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. Quality control should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been processed correctly. The quality management system should use a risk-based approach that incorporates critical process and data identification, risk identification, risk evaluation, risk control, risk communication, risk review, risk reporting, risk minimization measures, and risk management. See the ZWE-GCP for additional details on each of these risk elements.

CT-AppAuth states that the protocol should contain a description on how to maintain quality control and quality assurance of the study—such as criteria for selection of investigators, monitors, and the monitoring plan—which are in line with the International Council for Harmonisation’s Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZWE-73).

Per the ZWE-GCP, the sponsor must take prompt action to correct any noncompliance with the protocol, SOPs, GCP, and/or applicable regulatory requirement(s) by an investigator/institution, or by member(s) of the sponsor's staff. If noncompliance that significantly affects or has the potential to significantly affect human participant protection or reliability of trial results is discovered, the sponsor should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions.

Monitoring Requirements

Per ZWE-GCP, when performing an audit, the sponsor should consider the purpose of an audit, which is independent of and separate from routine monitoring or quality control functions. The audit is meant to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirements. The sponsor should appoint individuals who are independent of the clinical trials/systems to conduct audits. The sponsor should ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience to conduct audits properly. The sponsor should ensure that the auditing of clinical trials/systems is conducted in accordance with the sponsor's written procedures on what to audit, how to audit, the frequency of audits, and the form and content of audit reports. The sponsor's audit plan and procedures for a trial audit should be guided by the importance of the trial submissions to regulatory authorities, the number of participants in the trial, the type and complexity of the trial, the level of risks to the trial participants, and any identified problem(s). The observations and findings of the auditor(s) should be documented. Regulatory authority(ies) may seek access to an audit report on a case-by-case basis when evidence of serious GCP non-compliance exists or in the course of legal proceedings. When required by applicable law or regulation, the sponsor should provide an audit certificate.

Per the ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, sponsors must develop a monitoring plan that is tailored to human participant protection and data integrity risks, describes the monitoring strategy and responsibilities of all parties, outlines the methods and rationale for their use, emphasizes critical data and processes, gives particular attention to aspects outside routine clinical practice that require additional training, and references the applicable policies and procedures. Monitoring should verify participant protection, data accuracy, and protocol/GCP compliance. The ZWE-GCP requires sponsors to use a systematic, risk-based approach to monitoring, combining on-site and centralized activities with a documented rationale. Monitors serve as the sponsor’s primary contact, ensuring informed consent, adequate facilities, trained staff, accurate case report forms, investigational product control, and proper reporting. Written monitoring reports must be submitted to sponsors and MCAZ, with the principal investigator providing monitoring reports in annual renewal applications.

See the GCP-Inspections for guidance on how MCAZ inspections are conducted. Also see ZWE-GCP for additional details on MCAZ inspections and ZWE-86 for an inspection checklist.

Premature Study Termination/Suspension

Per the ZWE-GCP, if the monitoring and/or auditing identifies serious and/or persistent noncompliance on the part of an investigator/institution, the sponsor should terminate the investigator's/institution's participation in the trial. When an investigator's/institution's participation is terminated because of noncompliance, the sponsor should notify promptly the regulatory authority(ies). If a clinical trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor should promptly inform the investigators/institutions, the MCAZ, and the regulatory authority(ies) of the termination or suspension and the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. The ethics committee (EC) should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor or by the investigator/institution, as specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s).

The CTEthics states that researchers should inform the relevant institution(s), the review body(ies) that approved the research and, wherever possible, the research participants, if the research project is to be discontinued before the expected date of completion. For research at more than one (1) site, or research where there have been multiple ethical reviews, it must be clearly established, before the research begins, how this information will be communicated.

Data & Records Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Electronic Data Processing System

As indicated in the ZWE-GCP, the clinical trial should use error-free data processing programs with adequate user documentation. Adequate security and protection should be provided in the computer system for the accuracy of the data entered into the database. Any printout of the data, as well as duplicates, must be signed and dated. Procedures for corrections made at data entry, as well as documentation of corrections in the audit records, should be provided for the electronic data processing and management system or for the network system for remote data entry. Standard operating procedures (SOPs) should be maintained for using electronic systems and cover system setup, installation, and use. The SOPs should describe system validation and functionality testing, data collection and handling, system maintenance, system security measures, change control, data backup, recovery, contingency planning, and decommissioning. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties on the use of computerized systems should be clear, and the users should be provided with training in the use of the systems. The SOPs should also clearly state those who have access to the electronic systems and timed maintenance of the electronic system.

Records Management

Per the ZWE-GCP, the investigator should maintain adequate and accurate source documents and trial records that include information on the use of a drug and all pertinent observations on each of the site’s trial participants. Source data should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, accurate, and complete. Clinical research sites must store clinical research records (CRRs) in a way that ensures privacy, confidentiality, security, and accessibility throughout the clinical trial. To ensure the files’ integrity in storage, CRRs must be stored in a location requiring authorized access. Use of a double-locking system is mandated. The following should also be considered as part of the storage facility to ensure the integrity of the files: fire extinguishers within or around the archives and use of a fire detection system; protection of the study records from water (rain/flood); pest control measures; use of temperature and humidity controls to avoid deterioration of files; and protection of electronic storage devices from degradation, erasure, deletion, or corruption. Source data should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, accurate, and complete. Changes to source data should be traceable, not obscure the original entry, and explained, if necessary (e.g., via an audit trail). The data storage and processing systems should record, store, and transfer the information obtained from the trial participants during the conduct of the trial, and enable retrospective validation and evaluation of the progress and conduct of the trial. With respect to blinded clinical trials, the blindness should be completely maintained from the generation of random codes for allocation of treatments to the time of decision for revelation of random codes.

Regarding record retention periods, the protocol, documents, case report forms, informed consent forms, and other trial-related documents should be retained for at least 10 years by the sponsor; the trial participants’ documents should be retained for at least 10 years by the institution. The participant identification codes should be retained by the investigator and the sponsor for at least 10 years.

Per the ZWE-GCP, all required records and their duplicates should be kept at the trial-related sites for the duration of the above-mentioned retention period and should always be available for inspection by the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ). The inspector should be allowed to photocopy or duplicate the records by other electronic and/or optical means. Upon request of the monitor, auditor, ethics committee (EC), or the MCAZ, the investigator/institution should make available for direct access all requested trial-related documents. The sponsor must keep all records related to the conduct of a clinical trial in a format that facilitates verification for the purpose of an inspection. If safety concerns arise, the sponsor must submit requested records within 48 hours. Additionally, the MCAZ can request the submission of additional information within seven (7) days to facilitate the inspection of a site.

Personal Data Protection
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Responsible Parties

As per the DPAct, the data controller is any natural person or legal person licensed by the data protection authority—the Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe (POTRAZ)—who determines the purpose and means of processing data. The data processor refers to a natural person or legal person, who processes data for and on behalf of the data controller.

The DPRegs states that any person whether alone or jointly with others, who determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data must apply for a data controller license from POTRAZ. A data controller license is valid for a period of 12 months subject to compliance with applicable laws and regulations. See the DPRegs for details and procedures on applying for a data processing license. The data controller must appoint a data protection officer (DPO) and notify POTRAZ in writing, using form DP2 specified in the Third Schedule of DPRegs. A data controller must:

Notify POTRAZ of any change to the DPO’s number, email address, and physical address within a period of 14 days of such change
Notify POTRAZ of the dismissal or resignation of a DPO in writing within 14 days of termination of the DPO’s contract
Appoint a DPO within 90 days from the date of promulgation of DPRegs or the date of termination of a DPO contract
Per the DPRegs, a DPO must have skills, qualifications, or experience in any of the following: data science, data analytics, information security systems, information systems audit, law, audit, or any other relevant qualification. Further, the DPO must have knowledge of national data protection laws and practices, and an understanding of the data controller’s business operations and processing activities. Every DPO must undergo a certification course approved by POTRAZ. See the G-DPO for additional guidance on the appointment, roles, responsibilities, training, and certification of DPOs.

Data Protection

As per the DPAct, any entity or person operating in Zimbabwe (and outside) must adhere to data protection and privacy principles when collecting data such as the personal information of clinical trial participants. Per the DPAct, data includes any representation of facts, concepts, information, whether in text, audio, video, images, machine-readable code or instructions, in a form suitable for communications, interpretation, or processing in a computer device, computer system, database, electronic communications network or related devices and includes a computer program and traffic data. Genetic data is any personal information stemming from a deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) analysis.

The DPAct states that the data controller must ensure that the processing of data is necessary and that the data is processed fairly and lawfully. The data should be collected for specified, explicit, and legitimate purposes, considering all relevant factors, especially the reasonable expectations of the data subject and the applicable legal and regulatory provisions. For the purposes of processing personal information under this section, the health professional and the health professional’s agents are held to principles of confidentiality. Every data controller or data processor must ensure that personal information is handled in the following manner:

Processed in accordance with the right to privacy of the data subject
Processed lawfully, fairly, and in a transparent manner in relation to any data subject
Collected for explicit, specified, and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a manner incompatible with those purposes, as well as adequate, relevant, and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which it is processed
Collected only where a valid explanation is provided whenever information relating to family or private affairs is required
Is accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date, with every reasonable step being taken to ensure that any inaccurate personal data is erased or rectified without delay
Kept in a form that identifies the data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposes for which it was collected
The DPRegs stipulates that personal data must be processed securely by means of appropriate technical and organizational measures, which include risk assessments, development and implementation of organizational policies, and implementation of appropriate physical and technical measures during all data phases. Controllers and processors may put in place additional measures about the security of processing depending on the circumstances and risk posed by the processing. The measures must ensure the security, confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the controllers’ systems and services and the personal data being processed. Further, the measures must enable the data controller or data processor to restore access and availability of personal data in a timely manner in the event of a physical or technical incident. The data controller or data processor must ensure that there are appropriate processes in place to test the effectiveness of the security measures, and to undertake any required improvements. A data controller must report personal data breaches to the POTRAZ within 24 hours of becoming aware of the breach by submitting form DP3 (Data Breach Notification Form) specified in the Fourth Schedule of the DPRegs. Where the detected breach is likely to result in a high risk of adversely affecting individuals’ rights and freedoms, the controller must also inform those data subjects within 72 hours. See DPRegs for additional details.

Per the G-DPO, the DPO has the following duties to protect personal data:

Ensure compliance by the data controller with the provisions of the DPAct, regulations, notices, directives, and guidelines
Handle requests made to the data controller by POTRAZ pursuant to the DPAct
Inform and advise the employees about their obligations to comply with the DPAct and other data protection directives and notices
Monitor compliance with the DPAct and other data protection laws, and with organizational data protection polices, including managing internal data protection
Raise awareness of data protection issues, training staff, and conducting internal audits
Advise on and monitor data protection impact assessments
Report and cooperate with the POTRAZ in cases of data breaches
Serve as the first point of contact with the POTRAZ, and for data subjects in cases of data breaches or data subject access requests
Regarding trans-border flow of data, the DPAct states that the transfer of personal information by a data controller to a third party in a foreign country is prohibited unless an adequate level of protection is ensured in the recipient country or international organization. If an adequate level of protection is not assured, the transfer of such information is permissible where one (1) of the following instances takes place:

The data subject has unambiguously given their consent to the proposed transfer
The transfer is necessary for the performance of a contract between the data subject and the controller or the implementation of pre-contractual measures taken in response to the data subject's request
The transfer is necessary for the conclusion or performance of a contract concluded or to be concluded between the controller and a third party in the interest of the data subject
The transfer is necessary or legally required on important public interest grounds, or for the establishment, exercise, or defense of legal claims
The transfer is necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject
The transfer is made from a legal register, which is intended to provide information to the public and is open to consultation either by the public in general or by any person who can demonstrate a legitimate interest
See the DPAct for additional details, including on submittal and authorization from the data protection authority, consent requirements, and controller and processor responsibilities.

Consent for Processing Personal Data

The DPAct states that consent to processing personal data refers to any manifestation of specific unequivocal, freely given, informed expression of will by which the data subject or the legal representative accepts that their data be processed. For non-sensitive data, personal information may only be processed if the data subject consents to the processing of such data, which may be implied where the data subject is an adult natural person or has a legal persona and has full legal capacity to consent. See the DPAct for details on when the processing of non-sensitive data is permitted without the consent of the data subject. Regarding sensitive information, the data controller must not process sensitive data unless the data subject has given consent in writing. The consent to the processing of sensitive data may be withdrawn by the data subject at any time and without any explanation and free of charge. POTRAZ determines the circumstances when the prohibition to process sensitive data cannot be lifted even with the data subject’s consent (taking into account the factors surrounding the prohibition and the reasons for collecting the data). The processing of genetic, biometric sensitive, and health data is prohibited, unless the data subject has given consent in writing, which can be withdrawn by the data subject at any time without any reasons and free of charge. Health data may only be processed under the responsibility of a healthcare professional, except if the data subject has given written consent, or if the processing is necessary for the prevention of imminent danger, or for the mitigation of a specific criminal offence. See the DPAct for additional details on when processing of genetic, biometric sensitive, and health data may be processed without consent.

Per the DPRegs, a data controller must not make a decision based solely on automated processing when it affects a data subject, unless the decision was consented to by the data subject or allowed by law.

Consent for Processing Personal Data of Children

Per the DPAct, where the data subject is a child, their rights under the DPAct may be exercised by the parent or legal guardian(s). The DPRegs states that children’s personal information must not be processed without the consent of the parent/legal guardian of the child involved. Any data controller processing personal information of children must make reasonable efforts to verify that consent is given or authorized by the parent/legal guardian of the child, taking into consideration available technology.

Consent for Processing Personal Data of Physically, Mentally, or Legally Incapacitated People

Per the DPAct and the DPRegs, where the data subject is an adult that is physically, mentally, or legally incapable of exercising their rights under the DPAct, a legal representative/guardian may exercise such rights, or as provided by law or as designated by a court of competent jurisdiction.

Documentation Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Obtaining Consent

In all Zimbabwean clinical trials, a freely given informed consent must be obtained from each participant in accordance with the requirements set forth in the MSCAct, the ZWE-GCP, the CTEthics, and the Declaration of Helsinki (ZWE-70). As per the ZWE-GCP and the CTEthics, the informed consent form (ICF) is viewed as an essential document that must be reviewed by the institutional ethics committee (EC) and national EC, the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ), for approval with the clinical trial application. The MSC-Regs requires that the participant’s consent is documented in the ICF (ZWE-30) when submitting the application to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ).

To obtain consent, the ZWE-GCP and the CTEthics require that information is given in both oral and written form whenever possible. The language used in the oral and written consent information about the clinical trial should be as non-technical as practical and should be understandable to the participant or legal representative/guardian. No participant should be coerced or unduly influenced to participate or continue to participate in a trial. The participant or legal representative/guardian should be given ample opportunity to enquire about the details of the trial and be allowed sufficient time to decide whether they wish to participate. The information should make clear that refusal to participate or withdrawal from the trial at any stage is without any disadvantages for the person’s subsequent care. ZWE-49 and ZWE-50 state that the language used in the ICF should be non-coercive and written at a 6th grade reading level, medical jargon or technical terms should be avoided (or be followed by a description in lay terms), initials and/or abbreviations should be explained, and sentences should be short and concise. The ZWE-GCP indicates that none of the information concerning the trial should contain any language that causes the participant or legal representative/guardian to waive or appear to waive any legal rights or that releases or appears to release the investigator and/or sponsor from liability for negligence. See ZWE-49 and ZWE-50 for additional instruction and templates for researchers and institutional ECs on preparing ICFs for adult participants and legal representatives/guardians. ZWE-57 provides a sample ICF for the long-term storage and future use of specimens. (See the Consent for Specimen section for more information.)

The CTEthics additionally indicates that informed consent means a participant has been informed about the risks and benefits of the research, understands such risks and benefits, and is able to give consent to participate without coercion, undue influence, or inappropriate incentives. Researchers must be particularly aware of the vulnerability of prospective participants in terms of access to health services and education levels.

Re-Consent

Per the ZWE-GCP, the written ICF and any other written information for participants should be revised whenever important new information becomes available that may be relevant to consent. Any revised written ICF and written information must be submitted to the MRCZ and the MCAZ for approval in advance of use. The participant or legal representative/guardian must be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that might be relevant to their willingness to continue participation in the trial. The communication of this information should be documented.

Language Requirements

Per the ZWE-GCP and ZWE-49, both the English and vernacular versions (e.g., Shona/Ndebele) must be used in consent materials. Evidence of back translation and who performed the translation is required.

The Trslt-Ntc requires foreign researchers to use qualified translation institutions for translation of research materials. All translated research materials should be accompanied by a confirmation from a qualified translation institution. See ZWE-5 for a list of qualified language institutions.

Documenting Consent

Per the ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, prior to participation in a clinical trial, the written ICF should be signed and personally dated by the participant. Informed consent is documented using a written consent form approved by the EC and signed and dated by the participant or the participant’s legally authorized representative at the time of consent. According to the ZWE-GCP, if the potential participant is illiterate), an impartial witness must observe the entire informed consent process for each ICF administered. A copy of the signed and dated consent form must be given to the person signing for the participant and another copy retained in study files. CT-AppAuth states that the investigator should ensure the signature(s) and date(s) occur as required. Version-controlled and dated English and vernacular ICFs should be provided with the clinical trial application and be in line with MRCZ guidelines and templates, as provided in ZWE-49, ZWE-50, and ZWE-57.

Waiver of Consent

CTEthics requires that informed consent must be obtained from research participants before the research can begin, unless there are good reasons to the contrary, such as a coma, emergency, or mental incapacity. Prior approval of the EC must be obtained in all situations in which it is justifiable to initiate research without the informed consent of the participant.

Required Elements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Per the ZWE-GCP and the CTEthics, the informed consent form (ICF) should include the following statements or descriptions, as applicable (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

The clinical trial involves research and its purpose
The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment
The trial procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures
The participant’s responsibilities
Those aspects of the trial that are experimental
The reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the participant and, when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant
The reasonably expected benefits; when there is no intended clinical benefit to the participant, the participant should be made aware of this
The alternative procedure(s) or course(s) of treatment that may be available to the participant, and their important potential benefits and risks
The compensation and/or treatment available to the participant in the event of trial-related injury
The anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
The anticipated expenses, if any, to the participant for participating in the trial
The participant’s participation in the trial is voluntary and the participant may refuse to participate or withdraw from the trial, at any time
The participants’ identity will remain confidential whether results of the trial are published or not published
The Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) and other authorized persons will be granted direct access to the participants’ original medical records for verification of trial procedures and data
Should any new information that is relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue participating in the trial become available, it will be conveyed to them in a timely manner
The contact persons for further information about the trial or whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury
The participant may be requested to terminate participation in the trial
The expected duration of the trial
The approximate number of participants involved in the trial
The investigators’ qualifications
Statement that the research has been approved by an ethics committee
Contact details of research ethics committee representatives
In addition, see ZWE-30, ZWE-49, and ZWE-50 for additional MCAZ and Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) instruction and templates on preparing ICFs for adult participants and legal representatives/guardians. ZWE-57 provides a sample ICF for the long-term storage and future use of specimens. (See the Consent for Specimen section for more information.)

Participant Rights
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

In accordance with the ZWE-GCP, Zimbabwe’s ethical standards promote assurance that the rights, safety, and well-being of participants are protected, are consistent with the principles in the Declaration of Helsinki (ZWE-70), and that clinical trial data are credible. The CTEthics further states that the ethical principles for health research in Zimbabwe promote good, desirable, and acceptable conduct to protect the welfare and rights of research participants, and to reflect the basic ethical values of beneficence, justice, and respect for persons.

The Right to Participate, Abstain, or Withdraw

As stated in the CTEthics, potential participants must be assured that participation is voluntary, and that refusal to participate, or a decision to discontinue participation, will not involve any form of penalty. Further, the selection, recruitment, exclusion, and inclusion of research participants must be just and fair, based on sound scientific and ethical principles. No person may be inappropriately or unjustly excluded based on race, age, sex, sexual orientation, disability, education, religious beliefs, pregnancy, marital status, ethnic or social origin, conscience, belief, or language.

Per the ZWE-GCP, the informed consent discussion and written consent material should include an explanation that participation in the trial is voluntary and the participant may refuse to participate or withdraw from the trial, at any time.

The Right to Information

Per the CTEthics and the ZWE-GCP, potential research participants or legal representatives/guardians have the right to be informed about the nature and purpose of the research study, its anticipated duration, study procedures, any potential benefits or risks, any compensation or treatment in the case of injury, and any significant new information regarding the research study.

The Right to Privacy and Confidentiality

CTEthics states that privacy is concerned with access to personal records, and confidentiality refers to the use of personal information once it has been disclosed. A participant’s right to both privacy and confidentiality must be protected. The researcher must ensure that where personal information about research participants or a community is collected, stored, used, or destroyed, this is done in ways that respect the privacy or confidentiality of the participants or the community, and any agreements made with the participants or community.

Per the ZWE-GCP, the informed consent discussion and written consent material should include an explanation that the participants’ identity will remain confidential whether results of the trial are published or not. They should also be informed that the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) and other authorized persons will be granted direct access to the participants’ original medical records for verification of trial procedures and data.

The Right of Inquiry/Appeal

Per the CTEthics and the ZWE-GCP, the informed consent discussion and written consent material should include an explanation that the research participant or legal representative/guardian will be provided with contact information for the investigator(s) and the ethics committee (EC) to address trial-related inquiries and/or address any questions.

The Right to Safety and Welfare

Per the CTEthics and the ZWE-GCP, the rights, safety, and well-being of the trial participants are the most important considerations and should prevail over the interests of science and society.

Emergencies
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
As indicated in the CTEthics, written and verbal informed consent must be obtained, unless there are good reasons to the contrary, such as an emergency.

Per CT-AppAuth, if Zimbabwe has been declared to be in a public health emergency disaster by the President or Minister of Health, the World Health Organization (WHO), or any other designated person, an expedited regulatory review pathway for clinical trials will be implemented in line with ZWE-75. The emergency procedures implemented by the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) and the national ethics committee (EC), the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ), in coordination with the African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF) involves accelerated procedures, including EC review of consent. (See the Submission Process and Timeline of Review sections for additional details.)

Vulnerable Populations
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Overview

The CTEthics states that in Zimbabwe, researchers must be particularly aware of the vulnerability of prospective participants in terms of access to health services and education levels. Ethics committees (ECs) should be especially vigilant when considering research proposals involving vulnerable populations, including children, pregnant and nursing women, persons with mental illnesses or handicaps, members of communities unfamiliar with medical concepts, and persons with restricted freedom, such as prisoners. If a participant lacks capacity to exercise an informed choice to participate, an appropriate person to make the choice for them must be identified by the investigator.

In addition, the ZWE-GCP identifies individuals as vulnerable who may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation, or of a retaliatory response from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate. For example, members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable participants include patients with incurable diseases, persons in nursing homes, unemployed or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.

Children/Minors
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
ZWE-49 indicates that the age of majority in Zimbabwe is 18. Children under 18 years of age have not attained the legal age for consent to treatments or to participate in a clinical trial. Children who are seven (7) to 17 years of age can give assent through a written affirmative agreement to participate in a clinical trial. As per ZWE-50, when the research participant is a child under seven (7) years of age, the informed consent form (ICF) must be signed by the child’s parent/legal guardian. For children who are seven (7) to 17 years of age, the consent and assent requirements vary and are provided below. In addition, the ICF must include signatures in the appropriate sections if the study involves specimen collection and/or recording the child with photographs, video, or audio.

Assent Requirements

Per ZWE-11, assent means a child’s affirmative agreement to participate in research. Mere failure to object should not, absent affirmative agreement, be construed as assent. This means the child must actively show a willingness to participate in the research, rather than just complying with directions to participate and not resisting. The Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) has the discretion to judge children’s capacity to assent to be involved in a proposed research activity, or on an individual basis. The MRCZ considers the nature of the proposed research activity and the ages, maturity, and psychological state of the children involved when judging whether children are capable of assent, and also reviews the proposed assent procedure and the form and content of the information conveyed to the prospective participants. For research activities involving adolescents whose capacity to understand resembles that of adults, the assent procedure should likewise include information like what would be provided for informed consent by adults or for parental permission. For children whose age and maturity level limits their ability to fully comprehend the nature of the research activity, but who are still capable of being consulted about participation in research, it may be appropriate to focus on conveying an accurate picture of what the actual experience of participation in research is likely to be (for example, what the experience will be, how long it will take, whether it might involve any pain or discomfort). The assent procedure should reflect a reasonable effort to enable the child to understand, to the degree they are capable, what their participation in research would involve.

Per ZWE-11, a child’s assent is required, except in the following three (3) circumstances:

The capability of some or all children is so limited that they cannot reasonably be consulted
The intervention or procedure involved in the research holds out the prospect of direct benefit to the health or well-being of the children and is available only in the context of the research
The research meets the same conditions as those for waiver or alteration of informed consent in research involving adults
Per ZWE-11, the MRCZ determines the appropriate manner of documenting child assent. Based on such considerations as the child’s age, maturity, and degree of literacy, the committee decides what form of documentation, if any, is most appropriate. If adolescents are involved in research where a consent form would have been used if the participants were adults, it would generally be appropriate to use a similar form to document an adolescent’s assent. If young children are involved who cannot read, documentation should use a form that is appropriate for the purpose of recording that assent took place. The MRCZ may also decide that documentation of assent is not warranted. Finally, the MRCZ views informed consent as an ongoing process throughout the duration of a research study. When a child who was enrolled in research with parental or guardian permission subsequently reaches the legal age of consent, the participant is no longer regulated by the requirements regarding parental or guardian permission and child assent. Unless the MRCZ determines that the requirements for obtaining informed consent can be waived, the investigator should seek and obtain the legally effective informed consent, for the now-adult participant for any ongoing interactions or interventions with the participant.

As per ZWE-50, for children who are seven (7) to 17 years of age, a distinction is made between therapeutic and non-therapeutic research. For non-therapeutic research, the child’s parent/legal guardian must sign the ICF and a separate assent form must be signed by the child. For therapeutic research, the child’s parent/legal guardian must sign the ICF, and the child’s assent should be obtained with the child signing a separate assent form or with a single paragraph in the ICF that states, “I have discussed this clinical research study with the child using language which is understandable and appropriate. I believe I have fully informed this participant of the nature of the study and its possible risks and benefits. I believe the participant understood this explanation and assented to participate in this study.” This statement should be signed by the physician/investigator and by a witness. In circumstances when a specific child is not capable of providing assent and the prospect of therapeutic benefit is great, a request may be made to the ethics committee to waive consent. For children who are 13 to 17 years of age, a separate assent should be signed and dated by the child participant.

Pregnant Women, Fetuses & Neonates
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Per the ZWE-GCP, the informed consent form and other written material given to the participant must include an explanation of the reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant, as applicable.

Prisoners
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
The CTEthics points to the involvement of prisoners as a situation that calls for careful scrutiny. The principle of respect for persons requires that prisoners not be deprived of the opportunity to volunteer for research. However, under prison conditions they may be subtly coerced or unduly influenced to engage in research activities for which they would not otherwise volunteer. Respect for persons would then dictate that prisoners be protected. Those involved in clinical research need to balance the competing considerations.

Per ZWE-11, if a participant involved in ongoing research that was approved by the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) becomes a prisoner during the study, the researcher must promptly notify the MRCZ for re-review of the protocol. All research interactions and interventions with, and obtaining identifiable private information about, the now-incarcerated participant must be suspended. In special circumstances in which the investigator asserts that it is in the best interests of the participant to remain in the research study while incarcerated, the participant may continue to participate in the research.

Mentally Impaired
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
The CTEthics states that in Zimbabwe, ethics committees (ECs) should be especially vigilant when considering research proposals involving vulnerable populations, including persons with mental illnesses or handicaps.

Definition of Investigational Product
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
According to the ZWE-GCP, an investigational product is defined as a pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial including a product with a marketing authorization when used or assembled in a way different from the approved form, or when used for an unapproved indication or when used to gain further information about an approved use.

Note: The ZWE-GCP states it should be read in conjunction with other International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) guidelines (ZWE-80) that are relevant to the pharmaceutical development of investigational products.

Manufacturing & Import
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Manufacturing

As specified in the MSCAct, the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) authorizes the manufacture of medicines in Zimbabwe. Per the ZWE-GCP, the manufacture of investigational products (IPs) is subject to the same regulatory controls as marketed medicines. Furthermore, MSCAct and MSC-Regs specify that a premise license must be obtained from the MCAZ to manufacture medicines in the country. To apply for a license, the application form (ZWE-29), fees, and accompanying materials should be submitted to the Director General of MCAZ. To renew a license for a manufacturing premises, ZWE-2 indicates that requests to renew can also be made via the MCAZ Online Services Portal (also called the Zimbabwe Drug Information System (ZIMDIS)) (ZWE-82). As indicated in ZWE-15, the MCAZ Online Services Portal (ZWE-82) should be used for new applications and renewals. See ZWE-68 for more information on MCAZ licensing.

See the Regulatory Fees section for details on license fees for a manufacturer’s premises.

Per the ZWE-GCP, IPs should be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP), and they should be used in accordance with the approved protocol. The sponsor should ensure that the IPs (including active comparator(s) and placebo) are manufactured in accordance with GMP. The manufacturing of IPs is subject to control and inspection by the MCAZ, and certificates of analysis (COAs) must be provided for all IPs and comparator products. Chemistry and manufacturing information provided in the clinical trial application should be presented in a concise manner. If the pharmaceutical or chemical properties of the IP have been altered compared to those in use during animal testing or previous clinical trials, such alterations must be described and justified. Pharmaceutical and/or chemical alterations in an IP that is used in an ongoing clinical trial, and that may affect the quality, safety, and/or efficacy of the IP must immediately be reported to the MCAZ. If the composition of the medicinal product is altered, additional bioavailability or bioequivalence studies may be required.

As stated in the CT-AppAuth, the investigator’s brochure (IB) must contain proof of current GMP compliance at the manufacturing site(s). The IB should also contain documentation on quality and manufacturing of the IP (i.e., the IP dossier); stability data for initial batches, COAs for three (3) batches or batch analysis data for three (3) batches; and the name and address of the manufacturer(s) or manufacturing licenses. More details are provided in the International Council for Harmonisation’s (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZWE-73) and may be used when compiling information on this part. For MCAZ-registered medicinal products included in the clinical trial, the following documentation should be provided: generic and brand name (if any) of the product; product registration number and a current Package Insert or summary of product characteristics of the product; COA; and current GMP certificate from a national regulatory authority. For products that are approved by other regulatory authorities, such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), European Medicines Agency (EMA), the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), the World Health Organization (WHO) listed authorities, etc., and products that are prequalified by the WHO , proof of such approval should be submitted to the MCAZ, including current GMP certificates. In addition, certification of GMP compliance of manufacturing sites of the IPs, adjuvants, comparators, and placebos must be provided to the MCAZ. The amount and depth of information that would be submitted to the MCAZ depends on the clinical trial phase, novelty of the medicine, dosage form/route of administration, and the known or suspected risks. See the CT-AppAuth for the specific requirements on the chemistry and manufacturing requirements to be included in the IP dossier with the clinical trial application.

Import

The Sec75-Imports and ZWE-81 indicate that institutions that may apply for importation of IPs (referred to as “unregistered medicines” in the import requirements) under the exemption provisions of Section 75 of the MSCAct. Per the Pharm-IMPs and ZWE-68, the MCAZ must approve import permits for all IPs and other trial-related medical products. As delineated in the Pharm-IMPs, to import IPs, applicants are required to apply for authorization to the MCAZ by submitting the following:

A cover letter stating the full name and address of the innovator and/or manufacturer, the study sponsor, the recognized clinical research entity, the name/description of the IP, placebo, quantity to be imported, batch number, and shelf life of each IP to be imported
The quantity and source of each IP and trial-related products to be imported
Shipment documents and invoices of the IP purchased/to be purchased indicating quantities
A COA of IPs for all batches of each product to be imported
Lot release certificate(s) (where applicable) for all batches to be imported
Proof of payment of the appropriate fee
Per the Pharm-IMPs, applications can be submitted via email to mcaz@mcaz.co.zw and pvct@mcaz.co.zw using the Section 75 application tab on the Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-1) for the relevant clinical trial, or submitted as a hard copy to MCAZ at 106 Baines Avenue, Harare. Note that to import registered medicines for a clinical trial, the requirements in the MSC-ImportExport must be followed. The MCAZ will process an application for an import permit within five (5) working days. Incomplete applications will be rejected and the applicant will be required to resubmit a complete new application for authorization to import the IPs, including proof of payment of the appropriate fee.

Please note: Zimbabwe is party to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (ZWE-91) which may have implications for studies of IPs developed using certain non-human genetic resources (e.g., plants, animals, and microbes). For more information, see ZWE-92.

Quality Requirements
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Investigator’s Brochure

As specified in the ZWE-GCP, the sponsor must maintain a copy of all versions of the investigator’s brochure (IB) for the investigational product (IP), as well as records regarding each change made to the IB and the rationale and supporting documentation for each change. Per the ZWE-GCP and the CT-AppAuth, the IB must provide coverage of the following areas, each with literature references where appropriate (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

Table of Contents
A brief summary (preferably not exceeding two (2) pages), highlighting the significant physical, chemical, pharmaceutical, pharmacological, toxicological, pharmacokinetic, metabolic, and clinical information available that is relevant to the stage of clinical development of the IP
A brief introductory statement containing the chemical name of the IP(s); all active ingredients; the IP(s) pharmacological class and its expected position within this class (e.g., advantages); the rationale for performing research with the IP(s); the anticipated prophylactic, therapeutic, or diagnostic indication(s); and the general approach to be followed in evaluating the IP
Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties and formulation
Nonclinical studies information
The pharmacological aspects including its metabolism in all animal species tested, and the toxicological effects in any animal species tested under a single dose study, a repeated dose study or a special study, etc.
Results of clinical pharmacokinetic studies
Effects in humans, including information regarding safety, pharmacodynamics, efficacy, and dose responses
Summary of data and guidance for the investigator
Proof of current good manufacturing practice (GMP) showing compliance of the IP manufacturing site(s) and documentation on quality and manufacturing of the IP (IP dossier)
Stability data for initial batches, certificates of analysis (COAs) for three (3) batches or batch analysis data for three (3) batches
Name and address of the manufacturer(s) or manufacturing licenses
Quality Management

Per the ZWE-GCP, COAs must be provided for all investigational and comparator products that are used in clinical trials. Further, IPs should be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable GMP. As per CT-AppAuth, for products that are approved by other regulatory authorities, such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), European Medicines Agency (EMA), the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), and the World Health Organization (WHO) listed authorities, etc., and products that are prequalified by WHO, proof of such approval should be submitted to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ). In addition, the CT-AppAuth indicates that certification of GMP compliance of manufacturing sites of the IPs, adjuvants, comparators, and placebos must be provided to the MCAZ.

Labeling
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Investigational product (IP) labeling in Zimbabwe must comply with the requirements set forth in the ZWE-GCP and the Pharm-IMPs. Per ZWE-GCP, the sponsor should ensure that the IPs (including active comparator(s) and placebo) are adequately packed and labelled in a manner that protects the blinding (if applicable) and for clinical trial use only. In addition, the labelling should comply with the protocol. Per the Pharm-IMPs, study products must be labelled properly to ensure their safe administration and use by the research staff and participants and in a format that complies with all applicable requirements and maintains participant confidentiality. It is the site pharmacists’ responsibility to know the requirements for their jurisdiction. Prescription labels for study products should be distinguishable from other labels by an appropriate legend. According to the ZWE-GCP and the Pharm-IMPs, study labels should include the following information (Note: Each of the items listed below will not necessarily be found in both sources, which provide overlapping and unique elements):

A statement indicating that the drug is an IP and should only be used by a qualified investigator
The name, number, or identifying mark of the drug
Participant name or coded identification
The dispensing date and expiration date of the drug
Directions for dispensing the product, including the dosage if applicable
Instructions should be provided to the participant and/or the appropriate nursing service personnel if they advise the participant on the correct use of the study product
Number of dosing units dispensed
The recommended storage conditions for the drug
The batch/lot number of the drug
The name and address of the sponsor and prescribing investigator’s name
The protocol code or IP identification number
The trial name or study identification number
Name, address, and phone number of the dispensing site
According to the Pharm-IMPs, if a study product is mailed to a participant, it must be labelled properly, and receipt by the participant must be documented.

Product Management
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Supply, Storage, and Handling Requirements

Per the ZWE-GCP, the sponsor should provide an up-to-date investigator’s brochure (IB) to the investigator. The sponsor is also responsible for determining the acceptable storage temperatures and conditions, storage times, reconstitution fluids, and procedures for product infusion for the investigational products (IPs), if applicable. The investigator should be thoroughly familiar with the characteristics and appropriate use of the IP as described in the protocol, the current IB, the product information, and other information sources. Investigators in the trial should provide information on restrictions on the uses of the IP in any country. In addition, the Pharm-IMPs states that the principal investigator (PI) and/or investigator has the overall responsibility for all the medical products and IPs for the study. The pharmacist at each site participating in a clinical trial, who is designated as the pharmacist of record, is the primary individual who is expected to develop and maintain a study product management system, which includes the technical procedures for study product ordering, control, dispensing, and accountability. Their specific responsibilities are delineated in the Pharm-IMPs. The ZWE-GCP indicates that generally IPs used in clinical trials should be handled in the same way as registered medicines. The CT-AppAuth stipulates that leftover, expired, used, or broken IPs may be destroyed upon authorization by the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) and the study sponsor. An official request to dispose of the IPs, indicating the type, quantity of each product to be destroyed, and the method of destruction must be made to the MCAZ. The destruction certificate/letter confirming destruction must be submitted to the MCAZ. For more information on the destruction of IPs, see the Pharm-IMPs.

Record Requirements

As indicated in the ZWE-GCP, the records on IPs should document quantities, delivery, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction. The investigator should not provide the IPs to any individuals who are not trial participants. The sponsor should retain the batch samples of the IPs until at least two (2) years after the approval of a marketing application or after the conclusion of the clinical trial for an unapproved marketing application.

Per Pharm-IMPs, the pharmacist of record is responsible for ordering and maintaining records related to the receipt of protocol-provided study products, dispensing to participants, and disposition of study products. The pharmacist of record also maintains records of any trial-related products (including records for study medicines that are not provided as part of the protocol) received directly from other sources including adequate records showing the receipt, dispensing, dates, and quantities of the medicines. A copy of all records for study products should be retained, including records such as order forms, receipts for transfers and returns, packing slips, inventory, and accountability records. Trial-related records and any other unique pharmacy records should be retained until two (2) years after the investigation of the study product is discontinued. Accountability records and any other unique pharmacy information may be archived with case report forms after the protocol database is closed and the study is unblinded, if applicable. Pharmacy records and case report forms should be archived together. When archiving, pharmacy records should be placed in a folder or envelope and clearly marked as pharmacy records. The records should be available for inspection and copying by an authorized employee or representative/inspector of the regulatory authorities, upon request.

Also see the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ)’s form (ZWE-52) for documenting trial-related materials.

Definition of Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
The CTEthics defines human tissue as the substance, structure, and texture of which the human body or any part or organ of it is composed, which is removed or separated from a living human being and includes blood, blood components, and waste products. Genetic material is any source of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) or ribonucleic acid (RNA) that can be tested to obtain genetic information. It includes cells, whether as single cells or as part of tissues, and extracted DNA and RNA.

Specimen Import & Export
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
Import

No information is currently available related to the import of specimens.

Export

According to the CT-AppAuth, researchers must obtain approval from the Research Council of Zimbabwe (RCZ) to export biospecimens and/or materials. Per ProcForeignReg, foreign researchers’ application to the RCZ for a research permit must include the completed specimens transfer agreement (STA) form (ZWE-63) for the shipment of specimens and the materials transfer agreement form (ZWE-62) for shipment of non-biological specimens. As indicated in ProcForeignReg, Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ) approval is a prerequisite for RCZ consideration of a research permit application for shipment of biospecimens. Per ZWE-89, the MRCZ will forward the application for registration of a foreign researcher to the RCZ. The applicant must prepare 10 flat files, with each document in all 10 files clearly labeled. Of the 10 copies, eight (8) are for the RCZ, one (1) is for the MRCZ, and one (1) is for the applicant. Both the MRCZ and the RCZ must sign ZWE-89 and receive a copy of it. Per ZWE-89, 10 copies of the following documents must be included:

The principal investigator (PI) application letter
The MRCZ cover letter
The valid MRCZ approval letter
The valid RCZ registration certificate if the study is registered
The STA form (ZWE-63)
The study summary
The study protocol
The informed consent forms in English and Shona
The applicant’s good clinical practice (GCP) certificate
In addition, per ZWE-89, the application must include a stated finite date of destruction of leftover biospecimens, with a commitment to avail a copy of the record of destruction within two (2) months of this date.

Per G-RegForeignStud, any experimental tests, analyses, and investigational procedures on biospecimens and/or materials should be undertaken within Zimbabwe. However, where it is proven that no capacity for a particular test, analysis, and investigation of a biospecimen and/or material exists in Zimbabwe, or where exchange is needed for quality assurance purposes, the researcher must obtain approval from the RCZ to export the biospecimens and/or materials for research. The applicant must complete an STA form signed by the researcher and the recipient institution abroad.

Per ProcForeignReg and G-RegForeignStud, to export a biospecimen and/or material for research purposes, the researcher must complete an STA (ZWE-63) signed by the researcher and the recipient institution abroad. Type and quantities of specimens to be shipped, tests to be conducted, and justification for shipping to a foreign lab must be indicated on the STA annex form before submission to the RCZ. As indicated in ZWE-20, researchers exporting biospecimens out of Zimbabwe must provide the RCZ with a record of destruction of leftover biospecimens within two (2) months from the proposed date of destruction. The STA (ZWE-63) must state a destruction date and commit to completing the destruction when applying to export biospecimens.

Consent for Specimen
Share
Comment
Print this section
Last content review/update: November 12, 2025
In accordance with ZWE-57, investigators must obtain informed consent from clinical trial participants for the long-term storage and future use of specimens. The informed consent form (ICF) (ZWE-57) indicates participants must be informed that specimens will be collected for the laboratory tests described in the ICF that was signed to join the clinical trial. The following elements should be included in the specimens ICF:

Information about the collection, storage, and future use of leftover samples
Written permission to have leftover samples stored after the study has ended and used for future studies
Participation is voluntary and participants may choose not to have any samples stored other than what is needed to complete the study and still be in this research study or any future study
How the samples will be used in future research (e.g., DNA analysis or developing new diagnostic tests)
Study researchers will not contact the participant or the participant’s regular doctor with any results from tests done on the participant’s stored samples; if, in the very rare case that a specific test result gives important health information, the researchers will tell the study staff and the study staff will try to contact the participant
Samples will not be sold or used directly to produce commercial products
Research studies that want to use leftover samples must be reviewed and approved by the sponsors’ ethics committee (EC) and the Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe (MRCZ)
Each sample will be tested immediately for the tests mentioned in the study’s consent form, and the amount left over will be stored for future use
The name of the storage facility and laboratory where the specimens will be stored safely and securely in Zimbabwe
Only the people who work at the facility and approved researchers will have access to the samples, and they will not have any information that identifies the participant
There is no limit on duration of the long-term storage
In the future, any researcher who wants to use the samples for a new study must get approval from the MRCZ and the principal investigator
If the samples are used for future studies outside of Zimbabwe, only enough of the sample will be shipped to complete the tests required
Risks and benefits
The donor’s information will be kept private with coded and traceable labels and study staff are required to keep personal information confidential
Per ZWE-57, for more information about storage of specimens, inquiries should be sent to the MRCZ:

Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
Cnr Mazoe Street/ Josiah Tongogara Avenue
Harare, Zimbabwe
Phone: +263 4 791792, 791193
Mobile: 0784 956 128

Requirements
(Legislation) Data Protection Act [Chapter 11:22] (DPAct) (December 3, 2021)
Parliament
(Legislation) Health Professions Act [Chapter 27:19] (HProfAct) (Amended through December 31, 2017)
Parliament
(Legislation) Medicines and Allied Substances Control Act of 1969 [Chapter 15:03] (MSCAct) (Amended through December 31, 2017)
Parliament
(Legislation) National Biotechnology Authority Act [Chapter 14:31] (BioTechAct) (Amended through December 31, 2017)
Parliament
(Legislation) Research Act [Chapter 10:22] (ResearchAct) (Amended through December 31, 2017)
Parliament
(Regulation) Cyber and Data Protection (Licensing of Data Controllers and Appointment of Data Protection Officers) Regulations, 2024 (DPRegs) (Effective September 13, 2024)
Government of Zimbabwe
(Regulation) Medicines and Allied Substances Control (General) Regulations, 1991 (MSC-Regs) (Amended through August 7, 1998)
Government of Zimbabwe
(Regulation) Medicines and Allied Substances Control (Import and Export of Medicines) Regulations, 2008 (MSC-ImportExport) (Effective July 1, 2008)
Ministry of Health and Child Welfare
(Guidance) Cyber and Data Protection Implementation Guidelines on Appointment, Roles, Responsibilities, Training and Certification of Data Protection Officers (G-DPO) (Effective November 13, 2024)
Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Ethics Guidelines for Health Research Involving Human Participants in Zimbabwe (CTEthics) (Version 1.4) (September 30, 2011)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Guidelines for Clinical Trial Application and Authorization in Zimbabwe (MCAZ-PVCT-GL-04) (CT-AppAuth) (Revision 2) (Effective August 30, 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Guidelines for Conducting Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Inspections in Zimbabwe (MCAZ-PVCT-GL-01) (GCP-Inspections) (Revision 1) (Effective May 8, 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Guidelines for Good Clinical Trial Practice in Zimbabwe (MCAZ/PVCT/GL-05) (ZWE-GCP) (Revision 3) (Effective August 30, 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Guidelines for Registration of Foreign Students to Conduct Research in Zimbabwe (G-RegForeignStud) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Guidelines for Section 75 Applications to Import Unregistered Medicines (Sec75-Imports) (Effective January 12, 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Pharmacy Guidelines for Investigational Medical Products (Pharm-IMPs) (Version 2) (Effective November 29, 2023)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Procedures for Assessment of a Clinical Trial Release or General Release of a Human Vaccine (NBA-Proc) (Date Unavailable)
National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Procedures for Foreign Researchers Registration (ProcForeignReg) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Registration Fees for Foreign Researchers (RegFeesForeign) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Guidance) Reliance Guidelines for Regulation of Medicines (G-Reliance) (Effective March 24, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Circular) Circular No. 24 of 2025 – Fee Schedule (CT-Fees) (Effective September 1, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Circular) Circular No. 4 of 2023 – Change of Value Added Tax (VAT) Tax Rate from 14.5% to 15% (VATTax) (January 30, 2023)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Notice) Foreign Researchers Notice: Translation of Research Materials (Trslt-Ntc) (Effective September 17, 2024)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Policy) MCAZ Reliance Policy (ReliancePlcy) (Revision 2) (Effective April 25, 2024
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Policy) Zimbabwe National Pharmacovigilance Policy Handbook (PharmVigHdbk) (2nd Edition) (December 2016)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
Additional Resources
(Document) Clinical Trial Process Flowchart (ZWE-65) (Date Unavailable)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Document) Electronic Online Clinical Trial Application (e-CTR) Registry System for Use by Applicants and Researchers - External User Manual (ZWE-85) (June 2020)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Document) Electronic Pharmacovigilance Reporting System External User Manual (Revision 1) (ZWE-87) (October 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Document) Inspection Checklist (ZWE-86) (Version 2) (March 3, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Document) Institutions for Translating Documents in Indigenous Languages of Zimbabwe (ZWE-5) (Date Unavailable)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Document) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing (ZWE-91) (2011)
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Document) SOP for Managing and Documenting Regulatory Communication with Regulatory Bodies (ZWE-74) (Version No. 12.0) (March 13, 2025)
University of Zimbabwe
(International Guidance) AVAREF Strategy and Guidance for Emergency Preparedness (ZWE-75) (May 18, 2020)
African Vaccine Regulatory Forum, World Health Organization
(International Guidance) Declaration of Helsinki (ZWE-70) (October 2024)
World Medical Association
(International Guidance) Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1): Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6(R2) (ZWE-73) (Step 4 Version) (November 9, 2016)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(International Guidance) International Ethical Guidelines for Health-related Research Involving Humans (ZWE-79) (2016)
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS)
(Not Available Online) NIAID Communication with University of Zimbabwe (September 2025) (ZWE-83)
(Webpage) Application for Renewal of Registration Certificate (ZWE-17) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Biomedical Research and Training Institute – Institutional Review Board (ZWE-25) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Biomedical Research and Training Institute
(Webpage) Clinical Trial’s Oversight (CT) (ZWE-14) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-1) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Country Profile: Zimbabwe (ZWE-92) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
(Webpage) Criteria for Institution of Affiliation (ZWE-12) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Destruction for Leftover Bio specimens Exported out Of Zimbabwe (ZWE-20) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Expedited Review for Foreign Researchers’ Applications (ZWE-10) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) ICH Guidelines (ZWE-80) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(Webpage) MCAZ Online Services Login (ZWE-82) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe – Contact Us (ZWE-78) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe – Frequently Asked Questions (ZWE-11) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe – Overview (ZWE-7) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe – Vision/Mission (ZWE-8) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe - Import & Export (ZWE-81) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe - Licensing and Enforcement - Overview (ZWE-68) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe - Licensing (ZWE-2) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe - Who We Are (ZWE-3) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe – Clinical Trials (ZWE-4) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe – Contact Us (ZWE-66) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe – FAQs (ZWE-6) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) National Biotechnology Authority - About Us (ZWE-67) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) National Biotechnology Authority – Contact (ZWE-16) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
National Biotechnology Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) National Health Research Development Committee (ZWE-9) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Online Services (ZWE-15) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Overview of RCZ (ZWE-13) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Webpage) Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (ZWE-27) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Pan African Clinical Trials Registry
(Webpage) SAE, ADR and AEFI Electronic Reporting (ZWE-76) (Current as of November 12, 2025)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
Forms
(Form) Adverse Event Summary Table (MRCZ 108) (ZWE-48) (Date Unavailable)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Amendment/Modification Form (MRCZ 103) (ZWE-43) (Version 1.3) (February 19, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application for a Clinical Trial Protocol Amendment (PVF 82) (ZWE-84) (Revision 1) (January 2023)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application for Additional Investigator(s), Change of Investigator(s), or Additional Clinical Trial Sites (PVF 83) (ZWE-32) (Revision 1) (January 2023)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application for Authorization to Conduct a Clinical Trial (M.C. 10) (ZWE-28) (Date Unavailable)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application for Continuing Review of Research Activity (MRCZ 102) (ZWE-42) (Version 1.4) (May 27, 2024)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application for Issue of a License for Premises (D.C.1) (ZWE-29) (Date Unavailable)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application for Renewal of Registration Certificate: Foreign Researchers (RA2) (ZWE-60) (Version 3.0) (July 2018)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Application to Conduct Research (MRCZ 101) (ZWE-41) (Version 1.8) (May 2024)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Checklist: Application Package for Registration of Foreign Researcher and/or Shipment of Biospecimens Outside Zimbabwe Submitted to MRCZ for Forwarding to RCZ (ZWE-89) (Version 6.2) (March 25, 2022)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Clinical Trial Annual Progress Reporting Form for Investigators (PVF 76) (ZWE-77) (Revision 2) (May 2024)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Consent of Person Who Will Participate in a Clinical Trial (M.C. 17) (ZWE-30) (Date Unavailable)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Declaration by Co- and Sub-Investigators for GCP Compliance (PVF 81) (ZWE-33) (Revision 1) (September 2022)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Declaration by Principal Investigator for GCP Compliance (PVF 80) (ZWE-34) (Revision 1) (September 2022)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Destruction Form (MRCZ 113) (ZWE-52) (Version 1.2) (February 19, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) General Instructions for Researchers Preparing Informed Consent Forms for Adult Research Participants (MRCZ 109) (ZWE-49) (Version 1.5) (February 4, 2022)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) General Instructions for Researchers Writing Informed Consent Forms for Parental Consent (MRCZ 110) (ZWE-50) (Version 2.1) (April 17, 2022)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Indemnity Form for Conducting Clinical Trials (M.C. 20) (ZWE-40) (Date Unavailable)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Investigator-Initiated Withdrawal of MRCZ Application (MRCZ 120) (ZWE-55) (Version 1.2) (November 22, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Joint Declaration by Sponsor and Principal Investigator Concerning Sufficient Funds to Complete Study (PVF 79) (ZWE-35) (Revision 1) (September 2022)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Long-term Specimen Storage and Future Use Informed Consent Form (ZWE-57) (2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Materials Transfer Agreement Form for Shipment of Materials from Zimbabwe (ZWE-62) (Version 3.0) (March 2015)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Meeting Request Form (PVF 27) (ZWE-37) (Revision 5) (June 2023)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) MRCZ Death Report Form (MRCZ 104b) (ZWE-46) (Version 1.1) (Revised May 30, 2010)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Protocol Deviation Reporting Form (MRCZ 114) (ZWE-53) (Version 2) (March 3, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Recommended Format for CVs of Individuals Participating in Clinical Trials (PVF 78) (ZWE-36) (Revision 1) (January 2023)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Registration Form to Conduct Research (RA1) (ZWE-59) (Version 4.0) (July 2018)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Request for Extension of Study Duration (MRCZ 112) (ZWE-51) (Version 2.0) (March 3, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Response to MRCZ Comments Template (MRCZ 201) (ZWE-44) (Version 2) (May 10, 2017)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Serious Adverse Event Reporting Form (ZWE-39) (Version 3.0) (September 2021)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe and Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Specimens Transfer Agreement Form for Shipment of Bio-Specimens from Zimbabwe (ZWE-63) (Version 4.0) (July 2016)
Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Spontaneous Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) Report Form (PVF 01) (ZWE-38) (Revision 9) (September 2022)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Study Re-opening Request Form (MRCZ 105) (ZWE-56) (Version 1) (March 1, 2017)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
(Form) Submission Declaration Form – Declaration by Applicant (PVF 55) (ZWE-90) (Revision 3) (July 2022)
Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe
(Form) Termination of IRB Approval Form (MRCZ 105) (ZWE-47) (Version 1.2) (February 19, 2016)
Medical Research Council of Zimbabwe
ClinRegs NIAID Logo
Website Policies & Notices
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Related Government Websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Health and Human Services
USA.gov
Contact Us
Site Map
 

 
